Basis of Design
Geo-Engineering

Table of Contents
1.	Introduction	1
1.1	Purpose	1
1.2	GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor	1
1.3	ONxpress Geo-Engineering Works	2
2.	Abbreviations	3
3.	Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations	4
3.1	PA Specific Codes, Regulations and Guidelines	4
4.	Requirements Management	5
4.1	Departures from Design Standards (with justification)	5
5.	Units of Measurement	5
6.	Safety Assurance	5
7.	Applicable Software	6
8.	Multidisciplinary Collaboration	7
9.	Ground Conditions	8
9.1	Physiography	8
9.2	Regional Geology	8
9.3	Special Ground Conditions	8
10.	Geotechnical Design Approach	10
10.1	Characteristic Geotechnical Parameters	10
10.2	Geotechnical Design Criteria	14
10.3	Shallow footings	17
10.3.1	Ultimate Vertical Geotechnical Resistance	18
10.3.2	Ultimate Horizontal Geotechnical Resistance	18
10.3.3	Geotechnical Resistance at Serviceability	19
10.3.4	Raft Foundations and Slab on Grades	20
10.3.5	Global Stability	21
10.4	Deep Foundations	21
10.4.1	Geotechnical Axial Resistance	21
10.4.2	Geotechnical Lateral Resistance	26
10.4.3	Spacing and Group Effect	29
10.4.4	Settlement of a Caisson Pile	30
10.4.5	Negative Skin Friction	31
10.4.6	Pile Pull-out Resistance	31
10.4.7	Settlement of a Pile Group	32
10.5	Global Stability Analysis and Retaining Structures Global Stability Analysis and Retaining Structures	32
10.5.1	Open Cut / Slopes	32
10.5.2	Global Stability Analysis	33
10.5.3	Retaining Structures	34
10.5.4	Surcharges	37
10.5.5	Groundwater	37
10.6	Culverts and Tunnel	38
10.7	Frost Penetration	39
10.8	Seismic Geotechnical Considerations	40
10.8.1	Seismic Site Classification	40
10.8.2	Seismic Hazard	41
10.9	Heave and Buoyancy	42
10.10	Ground Anchors	42
10.11	Effects of Ground Movements and Construction Impact Assessment	43
10.12	Instrumentation and Monitoring	48
11.	Hydrogeology Design Approach	51
11.1	Identification of Locations that Require Water Management and Water Control	53
11.2	Water Taking Approach	54
11.3	Water Discharge Approach	54
12.	Geo-Environmental Design Approach	57
12.1	Geo-Environmental Soil Quality	57
12.2	Geo-Environmental Groundwater Quality	57
12.3	Corrosivity and Sulfate Attack	58
13.	Pavement Design Approach	58
14.	Materials Design Approach	60
14.1	Track	60
14.2	Civil Works	60
14.3	Civil Structures	60
14.4	Facilities	61
15.	References	61
15.1	Basis of Design Reports	61
15.2	Environmental Management Plans	62
15.3	Referenced Literature	62


List of Tables
Table 1: Project Agreement Specified Codes and Regulations	4
Table 2: ULS and SLS Consequence Factor (CSA S6-19 Table 6.1)	14
Table 3: Geotechnical Resistance Factors for Foundations (NBCC Table K-1)	15
Table 4: Global Stability – Factor of Safety	16
Table 5: Guidelines for Limiting Settlement of Framed Buildings and Load Bearing Walls  (CFEM Table 11.1, adapted from Poulos et al., 2001)	16
Table 6: Parameter β for the Calculation of the Resistance of the Pile Shaft (CFEM Table 18.1)	22
Table 7: Nt Parameter for the Calculation of Pile Tip Resistance (CFEM Table 18.2)	22
Table 8: Value of Nt for Different Pile Diameters (CFEM Section 18.2.1.2(4))	23
Table 9: Multiplier Factor Pm	30
Table 10: Geotechnical Parameters for Lateral Earth Pressure for Engineered Fill	39
Table 11: Relationship Between Category of Damage, Limiting Tensile Strain and Maximum Acceptable “Green Field” Ground Settlement  (Son and Cording, 2005, Table 4 and Table 6)	46
Table 12: Reference Design Basis Reports	61
Table 13: Reference Environmental Management Reports	62

List of Figures
Figure 1: Digital Delivery Workflow Between Structural and Geotechnical Engineers	7
Figure 2: Adhesion as a Function of Undrained Shear Strength	23
Figure 3: Tip Resistance of a Caisson (AASHTO 2020)	25
Figure 4: Load Distribution in the Socket (CFEM)	26
Figure 5: Horizontal Reaction Modulus for Granular Soils (API)	27
Figure 6: Typical Values of Ménard Coefficient α	28
Figure 7: Site Classification as a Function of Seismic Response	40
Figure 8: Staged Structure Impact Risk Assessment Process	44
Figure 9: Comparison Between Damage Estimation Criteria and Damage Levels Resulting from Field Observations, Physical Model Tests, and Numerical Parametric Studies (Son et al (2005), Figure 8)	45
Figure 10: Settlement Adjacent to Open Cut (After Peck 1969 CFEM Section 26.15.1)	47

List of Appendices
Appendix A Abbreviations
Appendix B Requirements Allocation for Geo-Engineering Design
Appendix C Regional Geology
Appendix D Properties for Geo-Engineering Design



1.Introduction
1.1Purpose
Regional Express Rail – On Corridor is being procured by Metrolinx (Contracting Authority) who has engaged the ONxpress Transportation Partners Inc. Joint Venture (ONxpress) to design and build the GO Rail Expansion-On-Corridor Program (OnCorr).
The purpose of this Basis of Design report is to outline the discipline design approach for the Geo-engineering aspects of the OnCorr program. Geo-engineering includes the following engineering disciplines:
Geotechnical
Hydrogeology
Geo-environmental (soil and groundwater quality/contamination)
Pavement
Materials.
This report should be read in conjunction with the latest version of the Project Agreement (PA) and other Construction Stage specific Basis of Design reports, as required. This report is part of the Design Development Definition (DDD, 25%) phase with the objective to:
Document the rationale, criteria, principles, assumptions, and constraints used for the detailed design of the project.
Identify discipline design Standards, Codes and Practices to apply to the design approach and maintain consistency and efficiency throughout the Program.
Summarize the scope of work applicable to the OnCorr project and the design criteria that will be considered as part of the ONxpress (Civil) Infrastructure design works.
Define the scope requirements and scope content of the infrastructure works and sub-works within a Construction Stage – design methodology and boundaries.
Propose integrated design procedures for elements of scope requiring multiple engineering disciplines (typically civil and structural).
Confirm the understanding of the overall geo-engineering scope(s) amongst all stakeholders.
1.2GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor
GO Transit is a regional transit system serving the Golden Horseshoe region of Ontario with the hub at Union Station in the City of Toronto. It operates on infrastructure that is either owned by Metrolinx (Contract Authority), or by third parties such as Canadian National (CN) Railway or Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR).
GO Rail Expansion is a program which will provide more travel options for residents and commuters. Upon delivery, the GO Rail Expansion program will provide faster, more frequent, two-way, all-day service on core segments of the GO rail network.
The On Corridor Works Program is a part of the Province's GO Rail Expansion. Under the GO Expansion, the fleet is expected to switch to electric locomotives. At the date of this report, further indications of specific vehicle requirements are not available.
1.3ONxpress Geo-Engineering Works
The geo-engineering design elements to support electrification of existing and new tracks over 280 km of corridor include:
Track/railbed widening
Track/railbed realignment
Installation of Overhead Catenary System (OCS) poles
New signals and foundations
Shallow excavation and backfill
Retaining walls
Noise walls
Existing station modifications
New at-grade stations
Traction power facilities
Parking lot and roadway pavement
Grade separations earthworks and supports
Bridge (under/over rail) and associated retaining walls/abutments
Pedestrian bridges and associated retaining walls/abutments
Trenchless method/jacked tunnels
Tunnels and pedestrian tunnels
Tunnels to facilitate installation of various project elements such as and not limited to cables and culverts
Embankments
Project wide materials engineering design support.
All of these design elements will require design from the geo-engineering disciplines. The geo-engineering design scope of work is described in the PA in submittals S-147, S-115, S-227, S-807 and S-811, to be prepared for DDS and CDS, and is applicable for:
Temporary works, such as excavations, dewatering, base and slope stability, ground movement, soil and groundwater handling and disposal
Permanent works, such as shallow and deep foundations, base and slope stability, subgrade, material selection, roadworks
Instrumentation and Monitoring works, such as ground instrumentation, protection requirements, data acquisition.
Some tasks described in the submittal descriptions within the PA are not part of the geo-engineering design scopes as these items would be completed by other EJV disciplines or during construction. Geotechnical support may be provided to some of the tasks below as necessary; however, the tasks that would not be part of the geo-engineering design scope include:
Location of excavation support systems, t o be determined by property allocation, structural, and construction requirements
Easement requirements for tie-backs, to be determined by property allocation, structural, and construction requirements
Sequencing of excavation and support system construction (unless required as part of design or the CIAR-2), to be determined by property allocation, structural, and construction requirements
Groundwater treatment and collection systems, to be determined by the dewatering contractor
Temporary/ permanent dewatering system selection and well spacing, to be determined by the dewatering contractor
Noise and Vibration control plan, to be determined by the environmental team
Pre/post construction conditions surveys and associated reports, to be undertaken by CJV
Structural design for buoyancy, to be determined by the structural team
Geotechnical Investigation specific requirements and output, to be determined by the investigations team.
2.Abbreviations
Abbreviations are commonly used in the Project Agreement, Metrolinx ONxpress, Regulators and other stakeholders’ documentation. Some of the terms used are acronyms developed by ONxpress to organize the work of the OnCorr program. The List of Abbreviations can be found in Appendix A.
3.Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
3.1PA Specific Codes, Regulations and Guidelines
The design of all buildings, structures and related facilities shall be based on applicable parts of the following codes, specifications, standards, regulations, and other references, as defined in the PA. In addition to these, the design shall comply with any laws or regulations of local authorities. The PA specifies a list of the codes listed below in regards with geotechnical designs. The precedence is assumed to follow the same order as listed in the PA. PA Section 1.2 specifies “any provision establishing a higher standard of safety, reliability, durability, performance or service shall take precedence over a provision establishing a lower standard of safety, reliability, durability, performance or service”. Based on that, for each of the listed codes and guidelines below for each structure, the ones establishing a higher standard of safety will be prioritised. The design shall comply with the requirements of all statutory bodies having jurisdiction over any part of the work including Fire, Building and Local Authorities including, but not limited to those listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Project Agreement Specified Codes and Regulations
Structure
Code
Civil Structures 
(Supporting only railway traffic)
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges & Structures, RC-0506-04STR, November 2018

American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association, Manual for Railway Engineering, 2021

AREMA Practical Guide to Railway Engineering 2nd Edition, 2003

GO Track Standards RC-0506-02TRK, July 2019

Metrolinx High Performance Waterproofing System Specification 07112

Ballast Mat System Specification 07113

Metrolinx Guidelines for Rail Corridor Raceway Requirements MXELEC-RCWY-2018-REV0.
Civil Structures 
(not supporting rail)
Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code, 2019, except where modified by MTO Structural Manual: Division 1 Exceptions to the Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code;

Municipal standards

MTO, Designated Sources of Materials (DSM) Manual;

American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association, Manual for Railway Engineering, 2021

Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges & Structures, RC-0506-04STR, November 2018

CP, Protection of Structures Adjacent to Railroad Tracks;

CN Guidelines for Design Of Railway Structures.
Culverts
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association, Manual for Railway Engineering, 2021

Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges & Structures, RC-0506-04STR, November 2018 for Box Culverts
Pavement and roadways
Municipal Standards;
Including City of Toronto, Transportation Services Road Engineering Design Guidelines 

Reference Documents issued by MTO.

OPSS guidelines (OPSS 510, OPSS 1103, OPSS 1150). 
Pavement and roadways
ASTM guidelines (ASTM D242, ASTM D692, ASTM D979, ASTM D995, ASTM D1073, ASTM D2027). 
Slabs on Grade
American Concrete Institute ACI-360-R10
Sign Support & High Mast Light Pole Structures Foundations
Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code, 2019

Ministry of Transportation Ontario, MTO Structural Manual, August 2021 (when within MTO Right of Way)
Metrolinx Retaining Walls (regardless of the presence of railway traffic)
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges & Structures, RC-0506-04STR, November 2018

Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code, 2019

Ministry of Transportation Ontario, MTO Structural Manual, August 2021
Drainage
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association, Manual for Railway Engineering, 2021
Other Structures 
(i.e. TPFs), Foundations and slopes
Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual, 2006
Protection of Existing Structures
For excavations adjacent to railway tracks:
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association, Manual for Railway Engineering, 2021
Protection of Existing Structures
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges & Structures, RC-0506-04STR, March 2018

City of Toronto requirements for excavations;

OPSS 539 for temporary protection systems
Tunnels 
(No Open Cut)
British Tunnelling Society, Specification for Tunnelling (3rd Edition)

U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration: FHWA-NHI-10-023 (Technical Manual for Design and Construction of Road Tunnels — Civil Elements) Dec 2009
4.Requirements Management
The list of project specific requirements for geo-engineering are listed in Appendix B.
4.1Departures from Design Standards (with justification)
To ensure that the overall ONxpress Project performance is not jeopardized, it is essential that deviations from the geo-engineering basis of design, and design criteria stated herein, be evaluated and formally approved prior to adoption.
In instances where specific physical constraints may require deviation, the designer shall identify specific location(s) and the nature of the deviation(s), and present these to the CJV’s Representative for review and approval.
5.Units of Measurement
All geo-engineering calculations will be performed in International System (SI - Metric) units.
6.Safety Assurance
Safe solutions are part of our core value, thus will be embedded in geo-engineering design. Our design process will ensure compliance to applicable codes/regulations/standards, as well as project specific safety requirements.

7.Applicable Software
The selection of which geo-engineering software (from the list below) will be based on the design need, required level of detail and at the discretion of the designer. Certain software with duplicate/redundant functionalities may be utilized for verification purposes as the design progresses.
GeoStudio – SLOPE/W, SEEP/W and SIGMA/W (GEOSLOPE/SEEQUENT)
DEEPFND (Deep Excavation)
DeepEx (Deep Excavation)
PLAXIS 2D and 3D (Bentley)
Plaxis Monopile Designer (Bentley)
Settle3 (Rocscience)
RSPile (Rocscience)
RS2 (Rocscience) (not 3D)
Slide (Rocscience); (2D/3D)
GROUP, LPile, PYWall (Ensoft)
Leapfrog Geo (SEEQUENT)
Cliq (GEOLOGISMIKI)
MSEW (ADAMA Engineering)
Aqtesolv
EQUIS (Earthsoft)
Hydro GeoAnalyst (Waterloo Hydrogeologic)
Visual OTTHYMO (Civic Infrastructure).
8.Multidisciplinary Collaboration
Based on CSA S6:19 6.10.1.2, “consultation between the structural engineer and the geotechnical engineer shall occur during planning, design, and construction of shallow foundations as specific loading details become available, including load inclination, eccentricity, and reduction factors, to be applied by the structural engineer. The geotechnical engineer shall review the geotechnical aspects of the plans before the design of shallow foundations are finalised.”
Collaboration between the other disciplines (such as structural, architectural, civil, utilities, track, mechanical, electrical, cable containment, environmental, geospatial..) and geo-engineering is important during all the stages of design to bring more value to the project. This will be made possible through digital delivery as it can be seen in the figure below. The workflow in Figure 1 shows the interface between the geo-engineering and other disciplines in addition to the digital delivery plan at different stages of the geotechnical works.

Figure 1: Digital Delivery Workflow Between Structural and Geotechnical Engineers
9.Ground Conditions
9.1Physiography
Toronto and the surrounding area fall under the Great Lakes-St Lawrence Lowlands physiographic region, one of Canada’s seven physiographic regions. Under this region, the GO rail corridor network covers several physiographic sub-regions in Toronto and the surrounding area. The physiography is characterized by flat to undulating topography, developed on sedimentary bedrock and covered by predominantly glacially derived soils deposited during the retreat of the Laurentide ice sheet 10,000 to 12,000 years ago. Prominent landforms in the region include: escarpments, glacial till moraines, glacial spillways, kame moraines, till plains, limestone plains, shale plains, sand plains, clay plains, eskers, drumlins, and ancient shorelines and beaches, notably are named:
Oak Ridges Moraine
Waterloo Moraine
Niagara Escarpment
Peel Plain
Iroquois Plain
South Slope.
9.2Regional Geology
The regional geology across the project is described in Appendix C with figures showing the regional superficial and bedrock geologies.
9.3Special Ground Conditions
Some unfavourable ground conditions (i.e., for which specialised investigation techniques and additional engineering measures are required) are anticipated to exist at various locations along the project alignment, two of which are highlighted below. Special consideration will be given to these conditions and will be accounted for during the design. These conditions may include, but are not limited to:
Loose/soft variable fills/soils (Toronto Harbourfront)
Highly organic soils/peat/muck
Subsurface gases in soil and/or bedrock (Georgian Bay Formation)
High water table for near or at surface groundwater conditions
Artesian conditions / confined aquifers (Oak Ridges Moraine) – where the groundwater is confined under pressure below layers of relatively impermeable soil or rock.
To address booming trade and manufacturing in Toronto and in an effort to expand the industrial and railway infrastructure, lake in-filling was undertaken to expand the south shore of Lake Ontario beginning in the 1850s. As a result, the reclaimed land stretching from Front Street in Toronto to the modern shoreline consists of highly variable fill material (with a wide range of granulometry and density).
The Oak Ridges Moraine, a kame moraine extending across Southern Ontario from the Niagara Escarpment to the Trent River, was formed during the Wisconsin glacial period when sands and gravels were deposited into a lake basin between the Laurentide ice sheet and the Niagara Escarpment. The core of the Oak Ridges Moraine is formed by glaciofluvial deposits consisting of sands and gravels. These permeable deposits form the Oak Ridges Moraine Aquifer Complex (ORMAC) in the greater Toronto area, over which the less permeable Halton Till lie (till cap). The presence of the confined to semi-confined aquifer may allow for artesian conditions in some areas in the greater Toronto area, notably in the vicinity of Richmond Hill GO Station where a dewatering system is in place to control artesian pressures.
10.Geotechnical Design Approach
For civil engineering structures, the geotechnical design criteria includes the geotechnical resistance of soils and rock to ultimate limit states and serviceability limit states for geotechnical elements. The factored geotechnical resistances depend on the geotechnical resistance coefficients specific to the type of the structure as well as the standards and codes governing this structure based on information provided in Section 3.1.
This section presents the methodology that will be used to undertake the interpretation of the ground conditions based on the results of the project geotechnical data.
It is worth mentioning that for some design stages, specifically DDD and DDS, data from the site investigations may not be available at the time of submission. For this reason, ground properties will be estimated during these stages and later compared with the results obtained from field and laboratory testing. If the results vary from the estimated values, the designs will be updated to reflect the new parameters. This may incur delays to some designs as well as design changes.
10.1Characteristic Geotechnical Parameters
The geotechnical codes, standards or manuals do not give strict recommendations on the selection of characteristic values for geotechnical parameters. Instead, in the guideline CFEM the engineer is given the choice to choose between the mean, a value slightly less than the mean or “A cautious estimate of the mean value for the affected volume of ground” as are generally considered to be a logical values to use for the characteristic value.
The determination of characteristic values for geotechnical parameters will be based on results and interpreted values from laboratory and in situ field test results, complemented by well established experience, published literature in the project area, and current industry practice. The selection of characteristic values for geotechnical parameters will take account of the following, as appropriate/required:
Geological and other background information, such as data from previous projects
The variability of the measured (soil/rock/groundwater) property values and other relevant information, e.g. existing knowledge
The extent of the field and laboratory investigation
The type (disturbed, undisturbed) and number of samples
The extent of the zone of ground governing the behaviour of the geotechnical structure at the limit state being considered
The ability of the geotechnical structure to transfer loads from weak to strong zones in the ground.
The zone of ground governing the behaviour of a geotechnical structure at a limit state is usually much larger than a test sample or the zone of ground affected in an in situ test. The characteristic value should be a geotechnical engineer’s best estimate of the likely values of parameters required for design.
The characteristic values of geotechnical parameters may be presented in the design memorandums and reports. The design geotechnical parameters will be calculated from characteristic values using Load and Resistance Factor Design method and will be presented in the geotechnical design reports and technical memorandums.
Where the data set cannot be analysed in such a way to obtain a characteristic value (due to a lack of sufficient number of data) and well established local experience exists, engineering judgment will be considered in the determination of the characteristic value. In the case that sufficient data is available for deriving a characteristic value, outliers that are considered misrepresentative of the data set will be identified and removed before populating the data pool from which the characteristic value will be interpreted.
A suite of geotechnical field and laboratory testing are being undertaken as part of the project to determine the soil/rock characteristic properties/parameters to support geo-engineering design. Table D in Appendix D shows the different verification methods (in situ and/or laboratory tests) required for the determination of the geo-ground properties/parameters discussed below. Some of these verification methods are specialized in situ tests and/or advanced laboratory tests that require undisturbed sample specimens. At a minimum, these specialized/advanced tests are to be completed at structure locations (as outlined below) to obtain project specific geo-engineering parameters (described below), for input to numerical modelling to reduce conservatism and risk in the analysis and for optimization of geotechnical designs. The following minimum criteria will be implemented for the location of advanced in situ soil testing / sampling:
Noise Barrier Wall
Noise walls are not be directly targeted for in situ testing/sampling, unless the soil conditions were observed to be unfavourable (based on review of background information) and no other structures exist in the stage.
Retaining Structure
Height of structure is greater than 3 m
Length of structure is greater than 100 m and height of wall is greater than 2 m
Retaining structure is in a “fill” location – requires widening of an existing embankment by placing new fill material over existing embankment fill.
Grade Separation
All grade separations are considered to require in situ testing and PQ soil coring for foundation design and design of lateral temporary and permanent track protection systems.
Line Station
Pedestrian bridge and/or tunnel to be constructed at the stations.
Location of geophysical testing:
Soils 3 m thick with characteristics consisting of Plasticity Index > 20%, moisture content ≥ 40%, and undrained shear strength < 25 kPa
Highly plastic clays exceeding 8 m thick
Soft to medium clays more than 30 m thick
Liquifiable soils, quick and highly sensitive clays, collapsible weakly cemented soils, and other soils susceptible to failure or collapse under seismic loading
Due to the inversion techniques and mathematical smoothing algorithms utilized in surficial geophysics, such as MASW, surficial geophysics should be augmented with existing information or borehole/ CPT to the depth of 30 m to define potential weak layers and to ground truth the geophysical survey.
Below is a list of most of the engineering parameters that will be identified from the laboratory and field testing that will follow ASTM standards.
In Situ Saturated Unit Weight (γ)
The unit weight for soils on site will be determined based on results of laboratory testing completed on undisturbed samples from site and augmented with common engineering references. For rock, the unit weight will be determined during routine testing such as unconfined compressive strength (UCS) testing. The results will also be compared to values commonly used in published literature.
Drained Shear Strength Properties (φ’, c’)
Values of the drained shear strength properties will be estimated from correlations, where laboratory and field testing is not available (but preferred), and augmented with laboratory testing of selected samples after the site investigation results are available.
The values of the drained shear strength will be estimated using the NAVFAC Design Manual 7.01, Soil Mechanics, Chen (2004), Bowles (1997) (as cited in Al-Shayea, N., 2006), Kulhawy and Chen (2007), Stark and Hussain (2013), and engineering judgment.
Shear strength parameters will be estimated based on the results of field tests such as CPT, SPT measurements, and laboratory tests (particle size distribution). Triaxial testing will be completed on undisturbed samples (from Shelby tubes or PQ soil coring) for cohesive soils and for non cohesive soils that will be difficult to obtain undisturbed samples, the samples will be reconstituted, if required.
Undrained Shear Strength (su)
Vane shear tests and CPT will be performed on site to determine the undrained shear strength of cohesive soils. Attempts should be made to obtain undisturbed samples of cohesive soils, particularly in areas of retaining and foundation structures and grade raises. Unconfined compression tests may be conducted on undisturbed samples of cohesive soils to measure the undrained shear strength.
At locations with cohesive deposits where those test results are not available, the soil’s undrained shear strength may be estimated from SPT tests according to Terzaghi and Peck (1967), or from the plasticity index after Holtz and Kovacs (1981).
Soil Elastic Modulus and Soil Compressibility
The elastic modulus of the soil will be determined in several ways, in particular by empirical correlations based on in situ test measurements (Bowles 1996, Kulhaway and Mayne 1990) or from field measurements using in situ pressuremeter tests, triaxial tests and CPT, particularly in areas of retaining and foundation structures, tunnels and grade raises.
The compressibility of clays will be estimated from consolidation tests in an oedometric cell used to obtain the recompression index (Cr) and the compression index (Cc). In the absence of laboratory testing, it will be estimated from empirical correlations such as, but not limited to those presented by Das and Sobhan (2014).
Rock Mass Parameters
Depending on the extent of the interaction between the structures and the rock, rock parameters will be established for both the intact rock properties as well as the rock mass properties, as required.
Intact rock properties will be determined through unconfined compressive strength (UCS) tests, and in some cases, with strain measurement for determining the elastic moduli properties. In situ pressuremeter testing may also be used to complement rock elastic moduli characterisation, as required.
Where the rock mass properties govern the design, the deformability and strength of the rock mass, will be carefully assessed during design using the findings of the additional ground investigations. For jointed rock masses where their engineering behavior is controlled by their discontinuities, these will be logged, characterised and interpreted by specialist rock mechanics engineers.
10.2Geotechnical Design Criteria
Resitance Factors (CFEM and CHBDC)
As stated in the CFEM guideline Section 8.4:
“LRFD is an example where the partial factors have been based on or calibrated using probability and reliability concepts. For the consideration of ultimate limit states, the separate consideration of loads, materials and performance provides the opportunity for the design to be more responsive to the differences between types of loads, material types, fundamental behaviour of the structure and of the ground, and consequence of different modes of unsatisfactorily performance (i.e., limit states).”
Foundations and geotechnical systems will be designed to satisfy the requirements of the ultimate and serviceability limit states (ULS and SLS, respectively) based on the following equations:
At ULS:						
At SLS:						
Where:
φgu and φgs – ultimate and serviceability geotechnical resistance factors respectively;
Ru and Rs 	- ultimate and serviceability geotechnical resistance;
αui and αsi 	- load factors at ULS and SLS respectively;
Fui and Fsi 	- load effects at ULS and SLS respectively.
I 	- represents various types of loads such as dead load, live load, wind load, etc.
The geotechnical resistance factors are based on the code governing the structure as identified in Section 3.1. CFEM references CHBDC and NBCC for geotechnical resistances. CHBDC includes an additional factor to be multiplied by the resistance factor, called a consequence factor Ψ, for ULS and SLS. The consequence factor (Ψ) for the ultimate limit state (ULS) and the serviceability limit state (SLS) will be determined in accordance with Table 6.1 of the CSA S6-19 standard – CHBDC according to the level of consequence established by the project. The level of consequence will be taken as established by the structural team.
Table 2: ULS and SLS Consequence Factor (CSA S6-19 Table 6.1)
Consequence level
Consequence factor Ψ
High
0.9
Typical
1.0
Low
1.15
Additionally, the geotechnical resistance factors ϕgu and ϕgs, respectively for the ultimate and serviceability limit states in CHBDC depend on the degree of understanding of the site. This will be determined in accordance with Table 6.2 of the CSA S6-19 standard. In the event that little or no recent geotechnical information is available, and/or the quantity and quality of the information transmitted is not ideal (high geotechnical risk), a low level of understanding will be retained. In the event that recent information is available, a typical degree of understanding will be used. Only in the case where recent geotechnical information is combined with detailed numerical modelling, the level of understanding may be increased to high.
Table 6.3 of CSA S6-19 will be used to determine geotechnical resistance factors for seismic design, where CHBDC applies.
Structural loads (factored and unfactored) will be provided by the structural engineer. The selection of appropriate load factors and load cases for geotechnical design and analysis will be coordinated with the structural team. For loads other than structural, the load factors will be in accordance with Table 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 of the CSA S3-19.
Resistance factors based on NBCC are shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Geotechnical Resistance Factors for Foundations (NBCC Table K-1)
Description
Resistance Factors
Shallow Foundations
a.Vertical resistance by semi-empirical analysis using laboratory and in situ test data
0.5
b.Sliding

(i) based on friction (c=0)
0.8
(ii) based on cohesion/adhesion (tan f=0)
0.6
Deep Foundations
a.Bearing resistance to axial load

(i) semi-empirical analysis using laboratory and in situ test data
0.4
(ii) analysis using static load test results
0.6
(iii) analysis using dynamic monitoring results
0.5
(iv) uplift resistance by semi-empirical analysis
0.3
(v) uplift resistance using loading test results
0.4
b.Horizontal load resistance
0.5
Note: Structural loads will be received as factored by the structural engineers. Load factors will be coordinated with the structural team to remove any redundancy. For other loads, the load factors will be in accordance with Table A-3 of NBCC.
Factors of Safety, Allowable Stress Design (AREMA & Global Stability)
For shallow foundations bearing capacities governed by AREMA code, the safety factor for Primary Loads shall not be less than 3.0; for Primary + Secondary Loads, the safety factor shall not be less than 2.0 (AREMA Section 3.4.2). Additionally, a factor of safety of 2.0 and 1.5 will be used for overturning and sliding respectively.
For pile foundations governed by AREMA, a factor of safety of 2.0 on pile capacity is taken (AREMA Section 24.3.2.5). For uplift capacity a factor of safety of 2.0 is considered for primary and secondary loads and a factor of safety of 3.0 will be used for combinations of secondary and dead loads.
For drilled shafts a factor of safety of 2.5 will be used (AREMA Section 24.3.2.5) for both compression and uplift capacities.
For anchored retaining walls, a factor of safety of 1.3 against the overall stability of the earth mass shall be used (AREMA Section 28.5.4.1).
In the case of global stability of slopes and retaining walls, Allowable stress design (ASD) is utilized resulting in a required Factor of Safety (FS) for the applicable design cases. The requisite FS with respect to design case is provided in Table 4.
Table 4: Global Stability – Factor of Safety
Design Case
FS
Static
1.5
Pseudo-Static
1.0
Post-Seismic1
1.1
Temporary2
1.3
Notes:
1 Where post-seismic strength reduction is applicable
2 Or as determined based on duration of works and associated risk and site understanding
Serviceability Criteria
Serviceability criteria for structures will be provided by the structural engineers or the manufacturers of certain structures such as MSE walls. In the absence of these values, the following recommendations will be provided in the geotechnical design reports.
For shallow footing in the absence of detailed requirements, the design input for the following parameters will be provided as per CSA S6:19 6.10.3:
Footing widths, m: 2, 4, 6
Settlements, mm: 13, 25, 50.
In addition, the following guidelines based on CFEM Table 11.1 will be considered in the absence of detailed requirements.
Table 5: Guidelines for Limiting Settlement of Framed Buildings and Load Bearing Walls 
(CFEM Table 11.1, adapted from Poulos et al., 2001)
Type of damage
Criterion
Limiting values
Structural damage
Angular distortion
1/150 – 1/250
Cracking in walls and partitions
Angular distortion
1/500
1/1000 – 1/1400: end bays
Visual appearance
Tilt
1/300
Connection to services
Total settlement
50 – 75 mm: sands
50 – 135 mm: clays
Cracking by relative sag*
Deflection ratio
1/2500: wall (length/height)=1
1/1250: wall (length/height)=5
Cracking by relative sag*
Deflection ratio
1/5000: wall (length/height)=1
1/2500: wall (length/height)=5
*for unreinforced load bearing walls
For studying impact assessment on existing structures, serviceability limits of structures will be provided by the manufacturers otherwise the acceptability criteria will be based on engineering judgement, literature and the following recommendations from the PA (referenced in Appendix B):
Lateral displacement of all temporary and permanent retaining walls supporting Railway Traffic shall be limited to maximum of 0.1% of the exposed height of the wall and in accordance with all applicable Engineering Reference Documents
The lateral displacement of all non-railway supporting retaining walls shall be limited to the magnitude that has no negative effect on the serviceability and durability of the wall and in accordance with all applicable Engineering Reference Documents.
10.3Shallow footings
The provisions of this section apply to shallow foundations including pads. Shallow foundations will be considered suitable where sufficient ground bearing resistance can be mobilised within the allowable serviceability limit state deflections. Shallow foundations may be considered suitable to support the following structures depending on the subsurface condition, but not limited to:
Stations
TPFs
Platforms
Retaining walls
Bridge abutments and piers
OCS foundations.
For footings, in most cases, the design will be supported by calculations based on well-established methodologies published in the literature. These will be used to determine:
Bearing pressures applied at foundation level
Ultimate geotechnical resistances (bearing capacity) of the founding strata
Settlement under serviceability conditions
Overall stability of the earth mass in case of foundations near slopes
Overturning (eccentricity) for foundations with overturning moments
Sliding at the base.
For conventional shallow foundations, overturning and slipping will be calculated by the structural engineer with geotechnical design input. Structures supported by spread footings and backfilled in a controlled manner are unlikely to undergo large unbalanced lateral loads. However, sliding resistance will be checked by considering waterproofing and its effects on sliding resistance where applicable. The ground-structure friction angle will be determined according to the recommendations of the CFEM, and may be determined by laboratory testing.
Shallow foundations will be designed based on the methodologies and references stated below. Shallow foundations will be designed based on the methodologies and references stated below. However, where shallow foundations interact with other foundations or structures, or difficult ground or geometrical conditions exist such that the methodologies below are considered too simplified and conservative for the 3D conditions, numerical modelling will be considered. Plaxis 2D/3D or equivalent will be utilised to model the real conditions and establish a solution. Shallow foundations will be designed based on the methodologies and refences stated below. However, where shallow foundations interact with other foundations or structures, or difficult ground or geometrical conditions exist such that the methodologies below are considered too simplified and conservative for the 3D conditions, numerical modelling will be considered. Plaxis 2D/3D or equivalent will be utilised to model the real conditions and establish a solution.
10.3.1Ultimate Vertical Geotechnical Resistance
Subsoils
The ultimate unfactored geotechnical resistance (ULS) of soils will be determined according to Section 6.10.2 of the CSA S6 standard and the commentary and Section 3.4 of AREMA.
If the load is eccentric, the proper load cases will be checked iteratively with the structural team to control the effects of tensile forces on the foundation.
The forces applied to the foundation (including vertical forces, eccentric forces, overturning moments and the effective width of the wall) will be provided by the structural designer.
Rock Mass of Very Weak to Low Resistance
For shallow foundations bearing on very weak rock masses, the bearing capacity may be estimated using the method described in Bowles 1996 (Section 4-16, equation 4-27), supported by guidance from Wyllie, DC (1999). For situations that require soil-structure interaction, the Mohr-Coulomb failure envelope will be utilised to represent the weak rock.
Foundations on Sloping Ground
Calculations for bearing capacity of a footing adjacent to a sloping ground will be based on recommendations from Bowles 1996 (Hansen or Vesic equations), as well as recommendations from Wyllie, DC (1999) for rock. Also, for this condition, global stability will be assessed as discussed in Section 10.3.5.
10.3.2Ultimate Horizontal Geotechnical Resistance
The factored horizontal geotechnical resistance shall not be less than the horizontal component of the factored loads. The factored horizontal geotechnical resistance at the ULS will be determined according to the equations presented in Section 6.10.4 of the CSA-06:19 code.
10.3.3Geotechnical Resistance at Serviceability
The magnitude of foundation displacements will be assessed based on experience and calculations to demonstrate that the proposed spread foundation will not exceed the allowable settlement of the structure they support. For spread foundations founded on relatively incompressible rock strata, settlements are likely to be small. Differential settlements will also be assessed between adjacent footings.
SLS resistances describe the types of stress that generate a certain deformation when applied to the subgrade or bedrock. Settlement calculations will primarily be performed using Settle3 software (or equivalent). The calculation will use multi-layer methods related to the Boussinesq theory for the distribution of stresses in the soil. For simpler structures, calculations will follow the guidance below.
Settlement in Granular Soils
The evaluation of settlements in granular soils will be carried out using stress-strain models (Es) according to the CHBDC, the CFEM or using the Hough method, recommended by AASHTO LRFD. To do this, the moduli of granular soils will be calculated using empirical correlations (Bowles, 1996) or results from geotechnical testing.
Settlements in Cohesive Soils
Terzaghi's theory applied to cohesive soils will be selected for settlement calculations for over consolidated and normally consolidated states.
In the absence of the oedometric consolidation test results, the correlations from the vane test(s), SPT, CPT or atterberg limits will be used to estimate the preconsolidation pressure (Lunne et al. 1997). In general, the additional stresses applied to the soil by the foundations and the embankments will be limited to 0.8 of the preconsolidation deviation (σ'p - σ'v0) to avoid consolidation settlements in the normally consolidated state and secondary settlements.	In the absence of the oedometric consolidation test results, the correlations from the vane test(s), SPT, CPT or atterberg limits will be used to estimate the preconsolidation pressure (Lunne et al. 1997). In general, the additional stresses applied to the soil by the foundations and the embankments will be limited to 0.8 of the preconsolidation deviation (σ'p - σ'v0) to avoid consolidation settlements in the normally consolidated state and secondary settlements.
In the case of clay, the total settlement corresponds to the sum of the primary consolidation settlements and the secondary consolidation settlements.
Settlements on Rock of Very Low to Low Resistance Rock Mass
Wylie's Method (1999) will be used to calculate settlements for a shallow foundation footing resting on a very fractured or soft bedrock.
10.3.4Raft Foundations and Slab on Grades
For raft foundations that are likely to cover larger areas and support multiple structural elements where the loading is not centralised, the local geotechnical profile will be scrutinised to quantify:
Variability of ground conditions
Establish the design stiffness of the underlying strata and consider compressibility of cohesive soils, if any
Derive modulus of subgrade reaction across the raft area.
The design for raft foundations will be undertaken in close collaboration with the structural team in order to derive representative values of spring reactions. The value of the spring reaction is not an intrinsic soil property, it is dependent on several factors such as the shape of the foundation, the distribution of the loading on top of the foundation, the stiffness of the foundation as well as the properties of the soil below. A change in any of these factors will influence the value of the spring reaction and eventually affect the distribution of the deformation and the structural forces. For this reason, an iterative process is likely required between the structural and the geotechnical teams in order to reach convergence of the value of spring reaction. This process may be shortened depending on the type of software. The structural loads envelope governing the design will be established by structural models and communicated to the geotechnical team. A set of soil spring reaction will then be provided to the structural team to use in the analysis. This process will be optimised using specific geotechnical software that consider soil-structure interaction. This will be undertaken using the software package PLAXIS (2D and/or 3D or an equivalent package) refining the selection of soil springs, where necessary. The structural loads envelope governing the design will be established by structural models and communicated to the geotechnical team. A set of soil spring reaction will then be provided to the structural team to use in the analysis. This process will be optimised using specific geotechnical software that consider soil-structure interaction. This will be undertaken using the software package PLAXIS (2D and/or 3D or an equivalent package) refining the selection of soil springs, where necessary.
If convergence of settlement is reached, the iterations will stop and the latest soil springs can be used to determine the envelope of structural forces of the raft for member detailing. Where settlements, differential settlements or joint movements are excessive, then consideration for amendment to raft stiffness, formation improvement or alternative foundations will be given.
If there are any changes during the design in the structural loads, foundation shape or stiffness, or if new information from the site investigation shows different soil properties, the exercise will be reiterated to absorb the new changes that will affect the value of the previous soil spring reactions.
Slab On-Ground
Similar to raft foundations, geotechnical design for slabs on-ground requires knowledge of the subsurface conditions and subgrade classification/properties (including potential for compressibility of cohesive soils), and groundwater elevations under the slab. The American Concrete Institute (ACI) Guide to Design of Slabs-on-Ground (ACI-360R-10) outlines the design of slabs on-ground through determination of the vertical modulus of subgrade reaction, k, of the subgrade soils, site preparation, subgrade stabilization, and preparation of the subbase and base materials.
10.3.5Global Stability
Global stability will be assessed using the limit equilibrium method for slopes, foundations adjacent to slopes, excavations, and retaining walls. The global stability will be analyzed considering the static total stress (short-term) and effective stress (long-term) condition, pseudo-static for permanent works, and post-seismic condition, where applicable.
The overall stability will be analyzed using the SLOPE/W software from GEOSTUDIO International Ltd or other equivalent software. The Morgenstern-Price and/ or Spencer methods will be used as they are more rigorous methods solving both force and moments. Alternative methods, such as simplified Bishop, Janbu, etc. may be considered if the analysis deems it more appropriate than the Morgenstern-Price or Spencer methods.
10.4Deep Foundations
Deep foundations on the project include bored piles, driven piles and caissons (with rock socket). For lighter structures such as poles or where structures need to offset buoyancy effects, micropiles or helical piles are suggested.
All deep foundations will be designed based on the methodologies and refences stated below. However, where foundations interact with other foundations or structures, or difficult ground or geometrical conditions exist such that the methodologies below are considered too simplified and conservative for the 3D conditions, numerical modelling will be considered. Plaxis 2D/3D or equivalent will be utilised to model the real conditions and establish a solution. For horizontal resistance of deep foundations, RSPile or LPile or equivalent software will be used.
10.4.1Geotechnical Axial Resistance
The geotechnical axial capacity of a single pile (R) can be evaluated by adding the contribution of the frictional resistance along the shaft (Rs) and the bearing capacity at the tip of the pile (Rt), as described in the CFEM Chapter 18:

Granular Soils
The approach applicable to non-cohesive soils is recommended by the CFEM.
Unit friction angle along the pile shaft will be calculated from the effective vertical stress of the soil at the depth considered
The value of the coefficient β is influenced both by the nature of the soil, its angle of internal friction, the method of placement, the compressibility and the initial vertical stress of the weight of the soil, then the shape, size and material constituent of the pile (steel, concrete, wood, etc.). Different equations and graphs can be used to determine the β coefficient. Table 6 from the CFEM (Table 18.1), is provided for information purposes.
Table 6: Parameter β for the Calculation of the Resistance of the Pile Shaft (CFEM Table 18.1)
Soil type
Cast-in-place piles
Driven pile
Silt
0.2 – 0.3
0.3 – 0.5
Loose sand
0.2 – 0.4
0.3 – 0.8
Medium sand
0.3 – 0.5
0.6 – 1.0
Dense sand
0.4 – 0.6
0.8 – 1.2
Gravel
0.4 – 0.7
0.8 – 1.5
The tip resistance, qt, will be calculated from the effective vertical stress of the soil at the tip of the pile and the coefficient Nt.
Different equations and graphs can be used to determine the Nt coefficient. Table 7 taken from the CFEM (Table 18.2), is provided for information purposes.
Table 7: Nt Parameter for the Calculation of Pile Tip Resistance (CFEM Table 18.2)
Soil type
Cast-in-place piles
Driven pile
Silt
10 - 30
20 – 40
Loose sand
20 – 30
30 – 80
Medium sand
30 – 60
50 – 120
Dense sand
50 – 100
100 – 120
Gravel
80 - 150
150 - 300
As noted in the CFEM and in Lunne et al. (1997), other calculation methods are available from results from in situ tests (in particular the piezocone test). These methods will also be utilised as appropriate on the project.
In the case of piles driven into the ground, the geotechnical resistance calculated above will be compared to the structural resistance of the pile considering the provision of article 6.11.4.5. The lower value of the two parameters will be retained for the structural design of the pile.
Cohesive Soils
Two approaches can be considered for the design of piles in cohesive soils (CFEM chapter 18).
1.Unit Friction with Total Stress Approach: where the shaft resistance is calculated from the undrained shear strength of the soil and the adhesion factor obtained below.

Figure 2: Adhesion as a Function of Undrained Shear Strength
2.Tip Resistance with the Full Stress Approach: where the shaft resistance is calculated from the undrained shear strength of the soil and the coefficient Nt obtained by the table below.
Table 8: Value of Nt for Different Pile Diameters (CFEM Section 18.2.1.2(4))
Diameter of cast in place pile
Nt
Less than 0.5 m 
9
Between 0.5 and 1.0 m 
7
More than 1.0 m
6
A fraction of the resistance at the tip and contributing to the axial resistance will be taken into account in the analysis.
Axial Resistance of Caissons (With or Without Rock Socket)
The total geotechnical resistance of caissons drilled in rock comes partly from the resistance at the base and partly from the adhesion along the socket according to the third assumption of Section 18.6.2 of the CFEM. In the case of a design with a foundation on a caisson with a rock socket, the contribution of soils and rock along the steel sheath is not included in the calculation of the axial geotechnical resistance of the caisson, because the axial resistance is taken into account only at the level of the socket. In the case of lateral resistance, soils and rock are taken into account.
In the case of caissons without a socket, the axial geotechnical resistance corresponds to the resistance at the base of the caisson.
As described in CFEM and AASHTO LRFD (2020), friction in rock is given by the equation based on the Horvath and Kenney method derived from the UCS of the rock and a constant C.
AASHTO (2020) recommends using an empirical constant C value of 1.0 under normal conditions, while CFEM recommends a range of values between 0.63 and 1.41 to reflect variability in test results obtained by different authors. The value of 1.41 corresponds to the “mean value to be retained for the limit states design approach”.
As recommended by AASHTO LRFD, and if the socket rock is fractured with RQD values less than 50%, the value of C should be multiplied by the joint modification factor, αE, which depends on the RQD index and the type of joint (open or closed).
It should be emphasized that the uniaxial compressive strength to be used should be the lower selected value between that of the rock forming the side wall of the caisson and the concrete compressive strength (f'c). In the case where f'c < UCSrock, the alternative equation recommended in CFEM will be utilised. It should be emphasized that the uniaxial compressive strength to be used should be the lower selected value between that of the rock forming the side wall of the caisson and the concrete compressive strength (f'c). In the case where f'c < UCSrock, the alternative equation recommended in CFEM will be utilised.
The maximum value of the ultimate unfactored geotechnical resistance at tip is given by the equation recommended in the CFEM derived from the compressive strength of the rock, bearing capacity coefficient Ksp and a depth factor determined from the length and diameter of the socket. The bearing capacity coefficient, Ksp, is calculated based on the spacing and opening of the rock mass discontinuities as well as the diameter of the socket shaft or the width of the foundation. This coefficient will be calculated using the characteristics of the joints taken from the forms of the structural descriptions of the rock and according to the equation taken from the CFEM.
According to the AASHTO LRFD, the tip resistance can also be estimated using the relationships presented in Figure 3 for which the rock parameters qu, mb, s and a will be determined as defined in clause 10.4. 6.4 of AASHTO LRFD (2020):

Figure 3: Tip Resistance of a Caisson (AASHTO 2020)
In any case, the tip resistance calculated with the two previous approaches cannot be less than that obtained for dense gravel using the calculation method described in Bowles 1996 (Section 4-16, equation 4-27) with the values following: an angle of friction equal to 45° for a rock whose RQD is between 25 and 50% and an angle of friction of a value of 40° for a rock whose RQD is less than 25%.
Figure 18.14 from the CFEM is reproduced in Figure 4. This figure is used for the load distribution in the socket contributing to the axial resistance. This distribution is a function of the Ec/Er ratio (modulus of elasticity of the concrete, Ec, divided by the modulus of the rock mass Er) and of the L/r ratio (length of the socket divided by the radius of the socket). The tip geotechnical resistance is determined from a theoretical analysis.

Figure 4: Load Distribution in the Socket (CFEM)
10.4.2Geotechnical Lateral Resistance
Lateral loads on a deep foundation can be generated by various stresses such as wind, seismic forces, etc. The ability of a deep foundation to resist lateral loads depends on several parameters including its stiffness, its thickness and the deformation characteristics of the soils that surround it.
The unfactored geotechnical lateral resistance of a deep foundation can be calculated using the p-y curves where "p" represents the resistance developed by soils and rock, expressed in units of force by its length and "y" the lateral deflection of the pile. The calculations will be analysed using RS Pile software or similar. The program generates the nonlinear response of soils in the form of p-y curves for side loading, and resolves the pile response.
The following considerations will be taken during the design:
Restrains applied on the top of pile
Type of loading i.e. static, dynamic or cyclic conditions
Group effect
Corrosion for HSS piles.
The p-y curve obtained at every meter depth interval, or in the middle of each layer, will be provided to the structural team who will use them to represent the nonlinear behavior of a pile (or that of a beam on an elastic foundation represented by a spring) and to apply the global structural model.
The choice of the p-y curve depends on the soil type and is explained below.
P-Y Curve in Granular Soils
The p-y curve to be used depends on the type of soil and the judgment of the engineer. One of the following patterns built into most commercial software will be used:
API Sand model
Sand model (Reese).
The p-y curve varies with the angle of internal friction (φ'), the effective unit weight of the soil (γ'), the horizontal reaction modulus of the soils (k or kh) and the pile diameter (D). The p-y curve is characterized by an initial linear reaction and an ultimate resistance (Pu). The parameters required to define the p-y curve of the soil are provided in the following sections.
The horizontal soil reaction modulus, kh, is calculated taking into account the most suitable soil model and the level of the groundwater table. Figure 5 is from the LPile Software Technical Manual and can be used to estimate the modulus kh for a granular soil represented by the API model for sands.

Figure 5: Horizontal Reaction Modulus for Granular Soils (API)
The modulus kh is represented by ks and kc depending on the case of static or cyclic loading.
When pressuremeter tests are carried out, the modulus kh is estimated from the equation of Baguelin et al. (1978), based on Ménard's theory. The Ménard coefficient α depends on the nature and resistance of the soil or even on the degree of fracturing of the rock (not to be confused with the joint modification factor αE). The values of this parameter α have been grouped together in Figure 6 and they are recommended by the authors.

Figure 6: Typical Values of Ménard Coefficient α
The values of the pressuremeter modulus Em are equivalent to the sum of the loading modulus E0 and the unloading modulus Er of the pressuremeter. Using these two modulus values (E0 and Er), the lateral soil reaction modulus kh can also be estimated from the equation by Briaud, 1992.
P-Y Curve in Cohesive Soils
Clay soils will be modeled according to one of the following models:
“Stiff Clay With No Free Water” (Reese) Model
“Stiff Clay With Free Water” (Reese) Model
“Soft Clay” (Matlock) Model.
The variables governing the behavior of the pile in clay soil and under lateral loading are the undrained shear strength (su), the effective unit weight (γ'), the diameter of the pile (D), the strains corresponding to half of the maximum principal stress (ε50) and the horizontal reaction modulus (kh) under static or cyclic loading conditions.
P-Y Curve for Rock
Fractured rock and competent rock will be modeled using the rock mass model developed by Liang et al. (2009). According to this model, the p-y curve is expressed by a hyperbolic curve.
The deformation modulus of the rock mass is obtained from the results of pressure meter tests, when available, or estimated from the GSI index.
Unless provided by the structural designer, the effective bending stiffness EpIp of the shaft is estimated by considering the percentage of steel equal to 1% of the area of the caisson section.
Lateral Pressure Caused By Liquefaction
Several empirical and approximate methods are available to estimate ground movements in situations where there is a possibility of liquefaction. Yod's lateral spread equation gives ground displacement as a function of site characteristics, soil profile properties, and earthquake magnitude as well as distance. The force corresponding to the mass of soil in motion is simulated by applying to the model a lateral displacement equivalent to the displacement determined for the soil layers subject to lateral spreading.
Loss of Lateral Resistance
As mentioned in Section 6.14.6.2 of the CHBDC, for loading cases involving seismic loads, the horizontal reaction modulus kh of the liquefied soil for piles or caissons will have to be reduced and will be considered to be zero (kh = 0 MPa).
10.4.3Spacing and Group Effect
Group effect will be analysed using softwares such as Group or Plaxis 2D/3D or equivalent. The methodology stated below represents the initial checks and code requirements that will be followed.
Effect on Axial Resistance
The axial resistance of a group of piles is the sum of the resistances of the individual piles multiplied by an efficiency factor Ce as per AASHTO 2020, Section 10.7.3.9.
The parameter Ce depends on the geometry of the group, the center-to-center spacing between the piles normalized by the diameter, as well as the type of pile used in the group. It will be determined based on recommendations from ASHTO 2020, Section 10.7.3.9. The parameter Ce depends on the geometry of the group, the center-to-center spacing between the piles normalized by the diameter, as well as the type of pile used in the group. It will be determined based on recommendations from ASHTO 2020, Section 10.7.3.9.
Ce will also be calculated using Converse Labarre's formula (Bolin, 1941, as cited in Al-Mhaidib, 2007). For all pile types considered, the minimum distance c/c will be 3D, D being the largest diameter of the pile in the group. A spacing of 3D c/c is equivalent to a free spacing of 2D between each pile. Ce will also be calculated using Converse Labarre's formula (Bolin, 1941, as cited in Al-Mhaidib, 2007). For all pile types considered, the minimum distance c/c will be 3D, D being the largest diameter of the pile in the group. A spacing of 3D c/c is equivalent to a free spacing of 2D between each pile.
With the exception of piles drilled in rock, and depending on the installation method, it is also possible to build a caisson with a minimum spacing of 2.5D (c/c) by respecting article 6.11.4.7 of the CHBDC for bored piles. The method of placing the caisson, whose spacing equals 2.5D c/c, involves an appropriate method to be defined by the contractor specializing in caissons according to the limitations indicated in article C6.11.4.7 of Comments of CHBDC. However, for a spacing of the caissons less than 3D c/c, the positioning sequence will be shifted.
For a group of piles in rock, the resistance of the group of piles can be taken as the nominal resistance of each caisson individually (751.37 Drilled shafts – Engineering Policy Guide (modot.org.)). There is therefore no group efficiency factor to take into account to obtain the axial resistance of the foundation unit.
Effect on Lateral Resistance
One of the most common methods to account for laterally loaded pile group effects is to modify the p-y curve of the unit pile using a p Multiplier factor, as recommended by AASHTO LRFD (2020, Section 10.7.2.4). In this approach, the resistance of soil and rock, p, is reduced by a constant designated Pm. The appropriate Pm factor depends mainly on the spacing of the piles and the position of the row in the group, as shown in Table 9.
Table 9: Multiplier Factor Pm
c/c spacing of bored piles 
(in the direction of the load)
Pm
2D
0.7
3D
0.8
5D
1.0
The lateral resistance of the caisson or pile head in the soil will be taken into account in the calculation of the lateral resistance of the foundation. When this head is in the water, no lateral resistance will be considered.
10.4.4Settlement of a Caisson Pile
The axial settlement of an isolated caisson will be calculated using the CFEM formulation which is based on the elastic solution proposed by Pells and Turner (1979) and compared to the method of Kulhawy and Carter (1988), recommended in the Federal publication Highway Administration (FHWA-NHI-10-016) titled Drilled Shaft: Construction Procedures and LRFD Design Methods. According to this last method, the load-displacement curve is divided into an elastic part and a plastic part (full slip) where the bonds between the concrete and the rock are completely broken and the behavior of the caisson is controlled by the angle of friction and cohesion between concrete and rock as well as the angle of expansion.
For caissons with a center to center spacing of less than 3D, the settlement of the group of caissons of the foundation will be evaluated to take into account the possible interaction between the caissons and the rock conditions in the zone of influence of the foundation.
10.4.5Negative Skin Friction
Granular Soils
Placement of embankments on the surface of the ground near the abutments after the installation of the piles will cause an increase in the stress of the soil surrounding the piles. The same could occur when cohesive soil undergoes consolidation due to dewatering or due to post-liquefaction settlement.
Negative friction in granular soil due to soil settlement around the pile can be calculated using the β method recommended by AASHTO LRFD (2020). The nominal unit friction of the shaft estimated in this way is linked to the effective stress of the unconsolidated deposits and to the load transfer coefficient βd, where the parameter βd is calculated according to AASHTO (2020). as follows:
Cohesive Soils
Negative skin friction is calculated as per AASHTO (2020) from the backfill height creating settlement around the pile, the friction parameter and effective vertical stress producing the settlement. It should be noted that the depth h may not be equal to the full height of the compressible soils and that depending on the type of actual adhesion between the pile and the surrounding soils, there are several expressions for the effective vertical stress.
Settlement Induced by Liquefaction (seismic conditions)
Liquefaction-induced settlements during a major earthquake will cause pile settlements associated primarily with downward movement of the soil above the liquefied strata.
The negative friction induced by the liquefaction of the underlying soils will be considered only if the liquefaction settlements are greater than 10 mm.
10.4.6Pile Pull-out Resistance
The pull-out resistance will be considered as the unfactored ultimate axial resistance (excluding the tip resistance).
The uplift resistance of a pile group will be considered as the lower of the following options:
The sum of the uplift resistance of the piles in the group
The sum of the shear resistance mobilized on the area of the perimeter of the group and the effective weight of the soil and the piles included in this perimeter.
10.4.7Settlement of a Pile Group
The settlement of a group of piles will be assessed for driven and drilled piles only inside unconsolidated deposits. The total load applied to the group (service load) as well as the geometry of the group will be provided by the Structural team.
The assessment of settlements will be carried out as described in Section 6.4.3 of AASHTO (2020).
Settlement is considered negligible (< 10 mm) for structures resting on caisson piles with a socket in the rock mass, or on piles resting on the bedrock.
10.5Global Stability Analysis and Retaining Structures Global Stability Analysis and Retaining Structures
Deep excavations using open cut slopes will result in a larger excavation footprint which may not be acceptable at all locations. This is mainly due to the excavation slope required to maintain stability through the varying thickness of soil deposits. Alternative soil retention systems that can achieve steeper gradients and reduce the overall footprint of the excavation have been developed. Consequently, the selection of soil retention designs will primarily be dependent upon the land available beyond the permanent works boundary including but not limited to the vicinity or site constraints of such boundary to existing structures, traffic management, orientation of structures and area planning. Other main selection criteria will revolve around the ground conditions and the ground water regime to be expected during temporary works.
10.5.1Open Cut / Slopes
Temporary open cuts/slopes will comply with all applicable regulations including, but not limited to Ontario’s Occupational Health and Safety Act O. Reg. 213/91. Excavations shall have the maximum slope as defined in O. Reg 213/91 s. 234 based on the determined soil type defined by O. Reg. 213/91 s. 226. Deep excavations will require detailed assessments and will also consider the following:
Loss of overall stability of the ground and associated structures
Basal heave instability
Groundwater management
Excessive movements in the ground due to shear deformations, settlement, heave
Damage or loss of serviceability in neighbouring structures, roads or services due to movements in the ground.
Particularly where EAS are within the vicinity of the excavations, slopes will not only be safe for workers, but will also be stable (i.e., minimal to no movement) to minimize ground movements and potential damage to EAS. Stable slopes thus will be designed with the aforementioned considerations along with anticipated dewatering settlements (if required). Analysis may be completed using LE or FE methods depending on application, risk, and site understanding.
10.5.2Global Stability Analysis
The global stability (temporary and permanent conditions) of slopes, abutments and retaining walls will be analyzed using SLOPE/W software from GEOSTUDIO International Ltd or other equivalent software. The Morgenstern-Price and/ or Spencer methods will be used as they are more rigorous methods solving both force and moments. Alternative methods, such as simplified Bishop, Janbu, etc. may be considered if the analysis deems it more appropriate than the Morgenstern-Price or Spencer methods. The precision of the factor of safety will be 0.1 (default value). The minimum depth of the sliding surface will be 1.0 m.
Most open cuts are not planned for long term conditions, hence a pseudo-static analysis will not be performed on temporary slopes and excavations.
The requisite FS as defined Table 4 for the respective design case are applicable to slope stability assessments. Slope stability analyses will be analysed considering the total stress (short-term) condition as well as effective stress (long-term), where applicable. Permanent slopes and structures shall also include a pseudo-static analysis which utilizes the horizontal acceleration coefficient, kh which in accordance of Section 4.6.7 of the CHBDC shall be a minimum ½ PGA and the vertical acceleration coefficient kv = 0 and kv = ±⅔kh. If materials that experience seismic softening are encountered, a post seismic analysis using reduced shear strength properties will also be completed. No live load surcharge will be included in pseudo-static analyses.
In some cases, a shotcrete facing may be required to maintain the soil slope geometry during the temporary works and protect against erosion and may typically be ignored in the slope stability analysis. If the strength of the shotcrete is utilized then production specifications and installation procedure and method will be defined and will be reviewed and accepted prior to excavation and installation.
Lateral Squeeze
As explained in FHWA NHI-06-088 (2006), the lateral squeeze phenomenon is due a load unbalance at the surface of a soft soil unit. The behaviour may be classified as two types i) short-term undrained deformation that occurs from a local bearing capacity type failure, or ii) long-term drained creep-type deformation. The threshold condition for lateral squeeze occurs when the load applied by the weight of fill exceeds three times the undrained shear strength of the soft foundation soils. The factor of safety against lateral squeeze failure will be calculated from FHWA (2006). FHWA (2006) expresses caution when determining the factor of safety and that when it is less than 2, a rigorous slope stability analysis is required and possibly a finite element analysis. The factor of safety against lateral squeeze failure will be calculated from FHWA (2006). FHWA (2006) expresses caution when determining the factor of safety and that when it is less than 2, a rigorous slope stability analysis is required and possibly a finite element analysis.
10.5.3Retaining Structures
The following limit states will apply to most of the retaining structures. Some retaining structures may not exhibit all the limit states presented below.
Global instability: For the overall wall dimensions and its embedment length into competent strata will be designed to satisfy such limit state.
Failure of a structural element: such as wall, anchorage, waler or strut or failure of the connection between such elements: when the wall’s geometry satisfies the overall stability limit state, its structural components will be designed to be sufficiently robust to sustain all forces and moments applied to the wall.
Failure by hydraulic heave and piping: Dewatering will be put in place during excavation and will progress as the excavation progresses. Consequently, there will not be a situation where high seepage forces are allowed to develop behind the wall system and thus this limit state will not be critical. Appropriate instrumentation will be installed and monitoring undertaken to ensure the dewatered groundwater profile achieves any assumptions made in the design analyses.
Sliding of the retaining structure: which may cause collapse or affect the appearance or efficient use of the structure or nearby structures or services, which rely on it. Design will be completed to ensure sufficient resistance against horizontal forces.
Exceeding Eccentricity: formerly known as overturning, when the resultant of reaction forces extents too far from the centre base width. Design will be completed limiting eccentricity.
Bearing instability: Loss of ground support by general bearing shear failure. Design will be completed ensuring sufficient bearing resistance for the load of the structure.
Basal heave: a form of bearing failure where the retained soil exceeds the resistance of the soil below the bottom of excavation causing the excavation to heave on the excavation to collapse. Basal heave will be check and design completed to ensure sufficient resistance against this mechanism of failure.
Lateral Squeeze: the lateral squeeze phenomenon is due a load unbalance at the surface of a soft soil unit. The threshold condition for lateral squeeze occurs when the load applied by the weight of fill exceeds three times the undrained shear strength of the soft foundation. Mitigations may include light weight fill and/or ground improvement.
Design
Retaining walls will be utilised as temporary structures on most of the project, referred to hereafter as Support Of Excavation (SOE). In some cases, retaining walls may be considered as part of the permanent structure. In these cases they will be designed to satisfy limits states for long-term conditions, referred to hereafter as retaining walls.
Different types of retaining walls are anticipated on the project. These include but not limited to, piled walls (contiguous or secant), soldier piles with lagging, sheet pile walls, diaphragm walls, MSE walls and/ or other types of conventional retaining walls.
The final choice of the wall for a particular application will be evaluated during DDS based on the ground conditions (particularly the need to retain groundwater – if required and the presence of obstructions), the need to restrict ground movements, extent of the site to accommodate construction plant, compatibility with permanent works, durability, environmental issues, cost, as well as speed of construction. The design will be based on LE analyses to obtain overall dimensions such as, pile size, number of intermediate supports and required pile lengths. The design will be based on LE analyses to obtain overall dimensions such as, pile size, number of intermediate supports and required pile lengths.
If necessary, designs will be supplemented by a plane-strain finite element analysis, using PLAXIS 2D or an equivalent software to account for soil-structure interaction mechanisms and obtain design loads and account for the effects of the construction sequence. If required, this will be undertaken on a representative critical section or sections of concern or special considerations (e.g. impact to EAS).
Where anchor or prop supports are proposed the entire excavation sequence will include:
Installation of anchor/props
Stressing of anchors/props
Excavation
Backfill and de-stressing will be considered.
Where anchors or prop supports are required the detailed proprietary design of the elements will be undertaken by specialist contractors. All support forces (including working forces and any required pre-stress) and assumptions concerning supports (including anchor free lengths, anchor declinations, anchor plan orientations, anchor or prop stiffness) will be communicated to the specialist contractor via design drawings and design reports.
The overall stability retaining walls will be assessed as discussed in Section 10.5.2.
For soldier piles with lagging, upon completion of the limit-equilibrium calculation, the kingpost piles will be designed as laterally loaded piles, accounting for three dimensional effects. This will be done by taking the resulting lateral load and overturning moment applied to the pile’s head from the retained soil; accounting for the pile spacing. The pile-soil system will be modelled using LPile or RSPile or an equivalent software. The software enables consideration of the three dimensional effects related to laterally loaded piles and models ground shear failure as well as non–linear ground behaviour. The output includes calculation of deflections together with structural forces acting on the pile. The structural output from the laterally loaded pile analyses will be used for the structural design of the kingpost piles.
Sheet pile walls will be designed in accordance with CFEM and/or AREMA as a retaining structure, which will be designed to control deformations caused by lateral pressure at the back of the walls.
These loading and stability conditions should be applied using the theoretical solutions and guidance provided in CFEM and/or AREMA.
The maximum allowable deformation of retaining walls will be based on the existence of any structure behind the wall as mentioned in Section 10.2.
Horizontal Springs
Lateral ground response will be governed by the construction method. For example, for open cut construction, where the gap between the natural ground and the structure is filled with engineered fill, the lateral response will be different from that where natural ground alone is acting on the structure.
For open excavation, bottom up construction and backfill, the lateral ground response will be governed by a combination of backfill and soil/rock materials. Empirical correlations for deriving the modulus of subgrade reaction are considered over simplistic as they would not capture the combined effects of the soil/rock and backfill material accurately.
The horizontal spring will be calculated using a simplified finite element model where necessary. This will be done through a plane strain model using Plaxis 2D or a similar software.
Conventional Retaining Walls
For conventional reaining walls that are not high and may not require soil/structure interaction or a detailed assessment, lateral forces caused by lateral earth pressure in active and passive condition will be calculated according to Coulomb theory taking into consideration the type of soil (normally consolidated or over consolidated) and the slope of the backfill. The choice of earth pressure coefficient (active, at rest or passive) depends on the movement of the retaining wall. If necessary, finite element modelling will be utilised as it helps understand the realistic mobilisation of the ground which brings value to the project.
For seismic conditions, the total (static + dynamic) thrust PAE may be determined by applying the Mononobe-Okabe (M-O) formulation or Generalized Limited Equilibrium (GLE) method.
Compaction surcharge generated by the placement and compaction of the granular backfill will be added to the earth pressure as prescribed in Section 6.12.3 of the CHBDC. A minimum additional thrust of 12.0 kPa will be provided at the surface of the backfill, which decreases linearly to 0 kPa at a depth of 1.7 m or 2.0 m below the surface to take into account the lateral force exerted by compaction, depending on the geotechnical properties of the backfill used.
Hydrostatic pressure will be added to the earth pressure if the soils are not drained. The groundwater level will be defined in the calculations. Below this level, the submerged unit weight of the ground added to the groundwater pressure will be considered in the calculation of the lateral earth pressure.
10.5.4Surcharges
The effect of surcharge behind retaining structures and/or on top of regraded slopes and/or rock cutting will be modelled to account for:
Existing structures (if any)
Temporary loads from construction equipment and from the stockpiling of construction material or excavated materials at the ground surface
Live loads due to construction activities; this includes the effect of highway/roadway loading (if not diverted and sufficiently close to the excavation). According to the indications of Sections 6.12.5 and 3.8.9 of the CHBDC (respectively), a highway surcharge equivalent to 0.8 m fill height will be applied and a pedestrian surcharge between 1.6 and 4 kN/m is to be considered in the static analyzes. The PA indicates a live load surcharge of 4.8 kPa for pedestrian load, 7.2 kN/m in mechanical rooms, and 12 kPa for roads as per Table C.1-1. The final live load will be agreed with the structural team. Live load for rail will follow Cooper E-80 loading as defined in AREMA
The impact of crane and equipment loads on the temporary excavation support will be based on loading information supplied by the crane suppliers and locations advised by the construction team.
10.5.5Groundwater
Project Agreement
Clauses that are extracted from the project agreement and are related to groundwater considerations are shown in Appendix B. The following recommendations are applicable to deep excavations where groundwater control is necessary.
Temporary Groundwater Profiles
Continuous dewatering activities will be put in place (as the excavation progresses), in conjunction with groundwater monitoring to ensure that the changes in groundwater regime in situ are controlled and as per the design analyses.
The groundwater table will be represented in the analyses by a piezometric line, or a hydraulic function defined between the locations of piezometers and open tubes.
Seepage analyses may need to be carried out for major temporary excavation works designed by EJV in order to check the seepage forces and groundwater profiles applied to all temporary and permanent retaining structures. The need for seepage analyses and criteria will be evaluated, on a case by case basis, by the hydrogeology team, if necessary.
The seepage analyses will be carried out using SEEP/W (part of the GEOSLOPE software package) or a similar software.
The output from seepage analysis will be used as an input to the slope stability or retaining wall analyses so that a realistic groundwater regime is considered to assess the stability of the temporary excavations and the overall stability of retaining walls.
Where specific groundwater profiles are assumed or reduced groundwater levels required as part of a design solutions, they will be clearly presented on design drawings and in design reports and they will be communicated to the Specialist Dewatering subcontractor as a performance criteria to ensure the input utilised in the design are reached on site.
Permanent Groundwater Profiles Permanent Groundwater Profiles
It is anticipated that in certain locations drains will be utilised to lower groundwater during temporary and permanent conditions. For permanent conditions this would result in lowering the groundwater level retained by structures. However, the PA requires structures to be designed for full hydrostatic pressure for permanent conditions. Designing for a realistic groundwater scenario will help optimise the design. Numerical modelling using SEEP/W, or similar, will help understand the anticipated permanent groundwater level. This methodology was suggested during the pursuit stage. However, the validity of this methodology relies on input from other disciplines as well as further approvals and will be confirmed in detailed design. Under discussionIt is anticipated that in certain locations drains will be utilised to lower groundwater during temporary and permanent conditions. For permanent conditions this would result in lowering the groundwater level retained by structures. However, the PA requires structures to be designed for full hydrostatic pressure for permanent conditions. Designing for a realistic groundwater scenario will help optimise the design. Numerical modelling using SEEP/W, or similar, will help understand the anticipated permanent groundwater level. This methodology was suggested during the pursuit stage. However, the validity of this methodology relies on input from other disciplines as well as further approvals and will be confirmed in detailed design.
10.6Culverts and Tunnel
Requirements of cut and cover for culverts will follow recommendations of OPSS Volume 3 Division 800 and Division 3000.Requirements of cut and cover for culverts will follow recommendations of OPSS Volume 3 Division 800 and Division 3000.
Geotechnical input for the design of culverts and tunnels will address the following points:
Soil parameters above, below and on the sides of the culvert
Rock strength parameters (if required)
Bearing capacity of supporting soils
Anticipated total and differential settlements resulting from the backfill
Backfill requirements
Temporary support and/or trenchless excavation method.
Lateral earth pressure will be calculated based on Section 10.5.3 of this report. According to the requirements of OPSS.PROV 1010, the backfilling behind the walls will be carried out by means of a granular material of type Granular ‘A’ or Granular ‘B’ Type II Lateral earth pressure will be calculated based on Section 10.5.3 of this report. According to the requirements of OPSS.PROV 1010, the backfilling behind the walls will be carried out by means of a granular material of type Granular ‘A’ or Granular ‘B’ Type II
The following parameters are recommended to calculate the lateral earth pressure that will be exerted on the interior face of the walls:
Table 10: Geotechnical Parameters for Lateral Earth Pressure for Engineered Fill
Type of Fill
Unit Weight (kN/m3)
Internal Angle of Friction (°)
Granular ‘A’
22
34
Granular ‘B’ Type II
22
34
Natural soil retained behind the wall
to be provided in applicable geotechnical reports

to be provided in applicable geotechnical reports


10.7Frost Penetration
Based on the depth of the foundations and buried structures, a suitable insulating layer may be required to minimize the amount of frost penetration and frost heave. Soil in contract with shallow foundations can freeze to the foundation, developing a substantial adfreeze bond. Soil that is frost susceptible can heave and transmit uplift forces to adjacent foundation. .
Frost penetration will follow the guidelines from OPSD 3090.101 where the frost depth in the project area varies between 1.2 m and 1.6 m. The PA specifies a minimum frost penetration depth of 1.2 m from the surface or more (PA, Table 6.1-1 Metrolinx Climate Parameters List: Probability and Source). Based on the PA, the following design requirements will be implemented: Frost penetration will follow the guidelines from OPSD 3090.101 where the frost depth in the project area varies between 1.2 m and 1.6 m. The PA specifies a minimum frost penetration depth of 1.2 m from the surface or more (PA, Table 6.1-1 Metrolinx Climate Parameters List: Probability and Source). Based on the PA, the following design requirements will be implemented:
The frost protection of shallow foundation shall be designed in DDS and CDS phase.
Insulated drainage layer between the secant piles and concrete facing to provide frost protection and to drain any water permeating through the construction joints between the secant piles and avoid any water from the retained soil reaching the exposed wall face.
The substructure and back face of the precast panels in front of H-Piles shall be design for protection from frost heave effects.
Shall design and construct the back face of the retaining walls for protection from frost heave effects.
10.8Seismic Geotechnical Considerations
10.8.1Seismic Site Classification
Depending on the type of structure to be built, the seismic classification of the site will be evaluated in accordance with the requirements of the CSA S6-19 standard presented in Figure 7. The seismic classification of the site will be determined using the average in situ shear wave velocity Vs (measured directly, using geophysical surveying methods) obtained over 30 m depth. Two different types of characterisation methods are considered for the project: Type 1) Intrusive geophysical methods such as downhole seismic testing (DST), crosshole seismic testing (CST) or vertical seismic profiling (VSP), and Type 2) non-intrusive geophysical methods such as multi-channel analysis of surface waves (MASW). If MASW is selected, it must be completed in conjunction with one 30 m borehole (in soil or to rock refusal), for calibration purposes; unless existing information to 30 m is available in the site area, to augment the results of the MASW.

Figure 7: Site Classification as a Function of Seismic Response
For seismic location category “F” sites, a specific site assessment will need to be performed. Geophysical tests (measurement of the velocity profile Vs) will be required to determine the profile of the shear wave velocity (Vs). The response of the site with an “F” seismic location category will be calculated using the methods below. For seismic location category “F” sites, a specific site assessment will need to be performed. Geophysical tests (measurement of the velocity profile Vs) will be required to determine the profile of the shear wave velocity (Vs). The response of the site with an “F” seismic location category will be calculated using the methods below.
10.8.2Seismic Hazard
The magnitude of earthquakes will be obtained from weathering results from a Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Analysis (PSHA), provided by the Geological Survey of Canada. The specific average value of the magnitude of the earthquake calculated for the natural period of the structure will be used in the liquefaction analyses, if necessary.
New structures will be designed to resist seismic loading. Seismic site classification and response will follow NBCC and OBC, as applicable. Seismic analyses will use a dual-level seismic design criterion with an upper-level design earthquake to provide a life safety performance objective. The upper-level design earthquake is a Maximum Design Earthquake (MDE) where the probability of exceedance is approximately 4 percent in the 100-year design life, or 2 percent probability exceedance in 50 years, as specified in the NBCC. Temporary works will be designed for a lower-level design earthquake. The lower-level design earthquake shall be the Operating Design Earthquake (ODE) where the probability of exceedance is approximately 20 percent in 100 years, or 10 percent in 50 years, as specified in the NBCC. Identification of Liquefaction Potential Identification of Liquefaction Potential.
Liquefaction is the sudden loss of strength likely to occur in saturated granular soils during seismic shaking, after an increase in pore pressure and a reduction in effective stress. The consequences of soil liquefaction can be serious and can cause significant damage to civil engineering works. The liquefaction potential will be evaluated from the available geotechnical data (drilling and CPT tests), with the aim of identifying the possible presence of soils sensitive to liquefaction on the site chosen for the construction of the structures, then to estimate the negative impact on the geotechnical design. The evaluation of the liquefaction potential is generally carried out by two methods: simplified and detailed. This evaluation is first carried out using the simplified calculation method according to the method of Youd et al. (2001) or Idriss and Boulanger (2008). The simplified method considers N values from SPT tests, CPT data or shear wave velocities Vs to determine if the deposit is potentially liquefiable. The liquefaction potential will be evaluated from the available geotechnical data (drilling and CPT tests), with the aim of identifying the possible presence of soils sensitive to liquefaction on the site chosen for the construction of the structures, then to estimate the negative impact on the geotechnical design. The evaluation of the liquefaction potential is generally carried out by two methods: simplified and detailed. This evaluation is first carried out using the simplified calculation method according to the method of Youd et al. (2001) or Idriss and Boulanger (2008). The simplified method considers N values from SPT tests, CPT data or shear wave velocities Vs to determine if the deposit is potentially liquefiable.
The simplified method is known to be conservative for soil liquefaction risk assessment, including underestimating soil cyclic resistance and overestimating cyclic soil demand under seismic conditions in eastern Canada. In contrast, cyclic demand can be more accurately assessed by site specific analysis. Site-specific analysis is based on the shear wave velocity profile and site-specific seismicity conditions, using earthquake signals consistent with the seismicity of eastern Canada.
The simplified method will be chosen for design purpose due to its robustness. For site specific assessments, the detailed method will be utilised.
10.9Heave and Buoyancy
For support of excavation (SOE) design, groundwater will be lowered below the excavation level. However, basal heave due to artesian pressure at depth may be an issue at the locations where confined aquifers exist. The design for basal heave due to artesian pressure will follow recommendations from CFEM Section 22.3.1.1. In these cases, relief wells are recommended to reduce the pressure of the confined aquifer during excavation so that it does not exceed 70% the total stress at the top of the confined aquifer.
After the structure is constructed, it will be subject to uplift pressure from water and buoyancy effects. If means for permanent drainage is implemented uplift pressure will be considered only is a confined aquifer exists below the structure. In these cases, the uplift pressure will be calculated by balancing the vertical forces above the confined aquifer. This geotechnical design input (uplift pressure) will be communicated to the structural engineer to account for buoyancy in the structural design (i.e. increasing the weight of the structure or using tension piles or anchors).
10.10Ground Anchors
If anchors are required for surface footings or retaining walls, their design will consider the following four failure modes:
Tension in the steel rod
Adhesion between the steel rod and the grout
Rupture at the grout-ground interface
Ground mass failure
Pull-out resistance will be verified by on-site pull-out tests.
The design of rock and soil anchors will be in accordance with Post-tensioning institute (PTI) – Recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors (PTI DC35.1-14) as well as the relevant design codes and standards listed in Section 3.1.
Tension in the Steel Rod
The steel rod manufacturer specifies the allowable stress based on the grade and quality of the steel. It will be ensured that the safety factor is sufficient to define the admissible resistance.
Failure at the Grout-Ground Interface
The unfactored pull-out resistance, developed at the grout-ground interface will be obtained based on calculation in CFEM 26.12.3. The allowable bond stress between the grout and the ground depend on the type of soil or rock as indicated in the guidelines. The resistance factors to be applied to these values will depend on the code as defined in Section 10.2. Anchors will not be formed in soft or firm clays, sensitive clays or uncontrolled fills.
For Rock Mass Failure
The general stability will be checked by ensuring that the anchor mobilizes a sufficient volume of rock to resist the pull-out load applied.
In the case where there are several anchorages, the interaction between the surface of the cones of the various adjacent anchorages will be taken into account.
10.11Effects of Ground Movements and Construction Impact Assessment
The requirements of the construction impact assessment are stated Appendix B.
General Approach
The assessment of impact to structures will follow the general approach described in Son et al (2005); which is compliant with the contract requirements.
The flowchart in Figure 8 illustrates the overall process, in compliance with the project requirements.

Figure 8: Staged Structure Impact Risk Assessment Process
The general approaches for impact assessment are:
Stage 1: Preliminary risk assessment: “Green-field” assessment of likely ground movements, with assumption that structures within the Influence Zone of excavations works that are likely to move more than 10mm or have induced slope greater than 1:500, or as accepted, are to be further assessed. The construction impact assessment report level 1 (CIRA-1) will to be completed with any preliminary risk assessment. CFEM procedure for assessing extent of settlements due to excavations in Section 26.15.1 of the manual will be utilised. Additionally, movements parallel to excavations and at the corners will assessed based on Roboski and Finno (2006) and Fuentes and Devriendt (2010).
Stage 2: Second stage risk assessment will be completed as part of the construction impact assessment report level 1 (CIRA-1). Maximum tensile strains induced in buildings or structures are assessed, taking into account the dimensions and type of structure. The assessed buildings or structures will be categorised in accordance with Figure 8 in Son et al (2005) shown for reference in the Figure 9.

Figure 9: Comparison Between Damage Estimation Criteria and Damage Levels Resulting from Field Observations, Physical Model Tests, and Numerical Parametric Studies (Son et al (2005), Figure 8)
Depending on the type of structure (building, pipe, etc..) the acceptable damage level will differ. If the results of the second stage assessment are not acceptable a stage 3 assessment will be required.
Stage 3: Detailed evaluation of risk assessment: This will be completed as part of the construction impact assessment report level 2 (CIAR-2). It will be undertaken on structures that did not pass the acceptability criteria in stage 1 and 2. Additionally, this stage will be undertaken for “Existing Adjacent Structures that are critical structures such as structures of historical or cultural significance, heritage buildings or essential services buildings, and major utilities such as trunk sewers, watermains, energy structures, communication structures and heating/cooling utility structures; and any Existing Adjacent Structures where underground excavation or other construction activity occurs below or above the Existing Adjacent Structure”. In this stage, a rigorous analysis taking into account plan dimensions, internal features and foundations of structures as well as the stiffness of the soil and the structure. This analysis will be undertaken by a finite element or finite difference method . Cross sections of the selected locations will be analysed accounting for the following effects:
Unloading of underlying strata due to excavation (vertical effect)
Loading of underlying strata due to fill placement (vertical effect)
Relaxation due to excavation (lateral effect)
Change in groundwater pressures due to dewatering/groundwater drawdown
Soil-structure interaction when temporary retaining systems are used
Construction sequence.
Any structures not passing the three stage will require ground movement mitigation (i.e., by reduction of movements at source, or by protective measures to the structures).
It should be noted that a list of sensitive of important buildings that require stage 3 assessment along the alignment was not included with the contract. Such buildings will be identified based on the as built or survey drawings of existing structures within the zone of influence of the Works.
A list of sensitive and important buildings that that qualify for an immediate stage 3 assessment without the previous stages will be agreed with Contract Authority during the detailed design. A list of sensitive and important buildings that that qualify for an immediate stage 3 assessment without the previous stages will be agreed with Contract Authority during the detailed design. A final list of buildings that qualify for an immediate stage 3 assessment without the previous stages will be agreed with Contract Authority during Construction Design Stage (CDS).
Table 11 summarises the categories of damage that will be used to group the assessed buildings or structures based on the tensile strains imposed by the construction activities (as extract from the Son and Cording, 2005, Table 4 and Table 6).
Table 11: Relationship Between Category of Damage, Limiting Tensile Strain and Maximum Acceptable “Green Field” Ground Settlement 
(Son and Cording, 2005, Table 4 and Table 6)
Risk Category
Damage level
Critical tensile strain 
(εc) [×10-3]
Approximately equivalent ground settlements and slopes 
(after Rankin 1988)



Max. slope of building*
Max settlement of building* [mm]
1
Negligible
0 – 0.5
Less than 1/500
Less than 10
2
Very slight
0.5 – 0.75


2
Slight
0.75 – 1.67
1/500 to 1/200
10 to 50
3
Moderate to severe
1.67 – 3.33
1/200 to 1/50
50 to 75
4
Severe to very severe
> 3.3
Greater than 1/50
Greater than 75
* These columns indicate “green field” settlements and settlement trough slopes
Figure 10 summarises the proposed process of impact assessment.
Determination of the Zone of Influence
Zone of Influence for Excavations:
Based on CFEM Section 26.15.1 the magnitude of vertical and horizontal movements in excavations may be reasonably assumed to be equal, with the exception of compressible soils that undergo consolidation where the vertical settlement in such case will be significantly more than the horizontal. For typical cases without consolidation settlement, the maximum settlements in excavations in sand and clay can extends up to 2 times the depth of the excavation. This value could extend up to 4 times the depth of the excavation when working in very soft clays with a low factor of safety against basal heave. This can be seen in the figure below as taken from Figure 26.21 in CFEM. This will establish the zone of influence (ZOI) for excavation works.

Figure 10: Settlement Adjacent to Open Cut (After Peck 1969 CFEM Section 26.15.1)
Zone of Influence for Tunnels:
For bored tunnels or trenchless methods, the zone of influence will be defined based on O’Reilly and New (1982), which indicates that the zone influence is at a distance from the center of the tunnel between 2.1z0 and 0.6z0 for soft soil to granular material above the water table respectively (where z0 is the depth of the tunnel below the ground surface). For cut and cover tunnels, the zone of influence will follow the above recommendations mentioned above for excavations.
Zone of Influence for Dewatering Works:
The zone of influence for dewatering works will be determined from hydrogeological calculations of the radius of influence by the hydrogeological team. Potential consolidation settlement within dewatering ZOI will be assessed by the geotechnical team.
As per the PA, a preconstruction condition survey will be undertaken on existing structures within the PZOI to determine the existing degree of damage. This is outside the scope of works however, recommendations on information that helps the design will be communicated properly to ensure they are added in the preconstruction condition surveys.
10.12Instrumentation and Monitoring
In supplement to the structure impact assessment staged process described above, a program of instrumentation and monitoring in the vicinity of the works will be implemented.
An instrumentation and monitoring system will be designed, in compliance with the PA. A computer database for the integration, storage, analysis, recording and processing of all monitored data will be established.
General Monitoring Philosophy
This design of the instrumentation and monitoring system will be based on the settlement analyses and damage risk assessment results, and to fulfill the following:
Verify the magnitude of measured ground movements and groundwater drawdown (where applicable) during construction so that a comparison can be made with design values
Verify the magnitude of measured deformation of support systems during construction to compare with design values and ensure that the design intent is met
Measure the magnitude of measured movement of buildings, utilities and other structures so that a comparison can be made with predicted values
Assess the need for remedial action or a change to the construction sequence if measured values are different from those predicted
Implement immediate remedial action should unfavourable monitoring trends develop
Provides a record of ground movements for future reference
Aid the safe completion of construction.
Instrumentation Hardware
The instrumentation plan developed for the project will be based on the instrument type, its function and the importance of the measurement for the design/construction. The types of instruments included in the plan will be summarised on the Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan. The purposes for which instruments may be selected for a monitoring program, and their general type, are described below:
Surface settlement points (survey points fixed to pavements or installed into the ground to measure surface settlement, or fixed to services where appropriate)
Building monitoring points (monitoring of structures using bi-reflex targets and glass prisms fixed to the structures, to enable three dimensional displacements to be optically recorded
Inclinometers (used to measure the lateral displacement of the ground or wall and will be installed in boreholes at suitable levels)
Extensometers (used to monitor ground movement occurring at various depths in the ground during construction)
Vibrating Wire (VW) Piezometers (fully grouted) to allow for real-time monitoring – this will be provided as part of the Ground Investigation
Water level observation wells (boreholes with slotted pipes backfilled with pea gravel) – this will be provided as part of the Ground Investigation
Crack meters (will be installed on existing structures as appropriate to measure displacements of existing structural defects and those noted during construction)
Tiltmeters (will be installed on existing structures as appropriate to measure displacements of existing structural defects and those noted during construction)
Strain gauges (to measure the strain in a member and give an indirect measurement of the stress within the member, if required)
Load Cells (to be fixed to anchors / struts to measure changes in pressure).
Proposed instrumentation layouts, monitoring programme, monitoring review levels and contingency strategies will be developed in compliance with the PA requirements during detailed design.
Baseline Readings and Response Levels
The monitoring of the piezometers/wells and standpipes that will be installed during the detailed design ground investigation along the alignment will be continued, after completion of the ground investigation, on a monthly basis until the construction starts at/near the piezometers/standpipe location to validate the groundwater regime adopted for the temporary works design. This will help establish the baseline readings for the groundwater position and groundwater pressures.
Baseline requirements for each monitoring instrument specific to the structure analysed and construction sequence will be provided within the GIMP.
A set of two movement control levels for all monitored elements are proposed, as part of the instrumentation and monitoring plan, and are defined as follows:
“Review Level”: means the instrumentation reading at which the need to modify construction means and methods to limit further movements, is assessed. This level will be set as a greater proportion of the serviceability limit, to be confirmed during CDS.
“Alert Level”: means the instrumentation reading indicating the maximum permissible ground or structural movement, alteration of groundwater level, change in internal forces of structural elements, or vibration level. This will be set at the serviceability limit or as required by adjacent or interfacing owners. If reached, work will be stopped immediately.
The serviceability limits which all the above levels will be based on will be defined during detailed design. The monitoring frequency will be reviewed based on which level has been reached in order to optimise the choice of remedial measures and enable optioneering of contingency preventive Works if and as required. Further detail of this process will be provided in the Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan.
11.Hydrogeology Design Approach
As per the PA – Part A – Schedule A-9 Section 9 (Subsection 9.1), the management of excess water, groundwater and dewatering effluent generated by the Project during the performance of the Initial Works will be managed. The dewatering requirements are also set out in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
The Groundwater Management and Dewatering Plan (GWMDP) generated for this project is a component of the Environmental Management System (EMS) and has been prepared to identify the approach, environmental requirements, standards, and procedures that will be followed by the ONxpress project (the Project) team personnel, contractors and its subcontractors for the management of groundwater and dewatering effluent that may result from project-related water management activities. The GWMDP will be implemented throughout the Project to control and minimize the potential environmental impacts generated during the execution of the Project, including water handling, testing, treatment, and discharge.
Construction of the project will require the management and removal of groundwater, uncontrolled precipitation. During construction precipitation may accumulate in excavations from rain and snow melt events, which may result in volumes that cannot be anticipated or known in advance. As a result, construction activities always include the implementation of proven industry standard approaches in order to manage these occurrences, including undertaking contingency planning.
Where deemed necessary, seepage analyses will be carried out on temporary short term construction excavations and may also be undertaken on long term (operational) permanent water management structures in order to determine the volume and quality of water to be taken and then discharged. The principles, approach, environmental requirements, standards and procedures that will be followed for the Construction Contractor (Civil) activities of the On-Corridor Works project (the Project) by personnel, contractors and its subcontractors for the management of groundwater. The GWMDP will be implemented throughout the Project construction duration at sites controlled by CC (Civil) to control and minimize the potential environmental impacts generated during the construction activities of the Initial Works of the Project. The GWMDP will be reviewed, consulted and implemented whenever there is any movement of groundwater around, onto, or off the project site (the site), including the following:
Management of excess groundwater and dewatering effluent encountered during excavation activities
Temporary storage of excess groundwater and dewatering effluent
On-site treatment of contaminated groundwater
Discharge of excess water, groundwater and dewatering effluent to regional or municipal sewer system
Off-site disposal of excess groundwater at a MECP approved waste receiving facility
Management of groundwater generated during monitoring and sampling activities for investigation purposes.
The PA requirements for groundwater management are listed in Appendix B.
A portion of precipitation water infiltrates into the ground, that water then seeps through more permeable units in the ground, from areas of higher elevation, and discharges to surface water features in areas of lower elevation. There are local and regional scale groundwater flow systems. A local flow system would be water infiltrating in an upland area and discharging at a nearby creek or river. A regional scale flow system would be groundwater infiltrating at a regional high point, such as the crest of the Oak Ridges Moraine, and flowing either south or north, towards Lake Ontario or Lake Simcoe. There are both regional scale and local scale groundwater flow systems, reflecting the configuration of aquifers (permeable units through which water flows) and aquitards (low permeability units which impede movement of groundwater). In the Greater Toronto area, groundwater flow systems are related to geological structures, which include both relatively recent glacial deposits, as well as the bedrock, and specifically, the upper portion where it is more weathered.
The Oak Ridges Moraine (ORM) is the most prominent topographic feature and high point in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA), and one of the most significant physiographic features, characterized as an east-west trending ridgeline. It is also generally the drainage divide for both surface and groundwater flow. The ORM, being composed of relatively permeable sediments, is the most significant groundwater recharge area, whereby precipitation percolates downwards to recharge both shallow and deeper aquifer systems in the area. Therefore, the regional groundwater flow is either northward from the ORM towards Lake Simcoe, or southward from the ORM towards Lake Ontario. Groundwater discharges to the many streams and rivers, especially those with incised valleys, or ultimately reaches either Lake Ontario (south) or Lake Simcoe (north).
In the west end of the Greater Golden Horseshoe Area (GGHA), the most prominent topographic feature is the Niagara Escarpment, which is a east facing, and generally north-south trending bedrock ridge. The Niagara Escarpment, along with corresponding glacial moraines on top of the Escarpment, also form a regional surface water divide, between the Lake Ontario and Lake Erie drainage basins (Grand River watershed in particular), and areas on top of the Escarpment are also significant groundwater recharge areas. Below the Niagara Escarpment, in the western end of the GTA, groundwater flows southward towards Lake Ontario, though recharge and groundwater flow is more limited due to the presence of lower permeability glacial tills and weathered shale bedrock in such areas. To the west of the Niagara Escarpment, groundwater infiltrates into more permeable overburden as well as bedrock aquifers, ultimately flowing towards river systems such as the Grand River.
The depth to the water table varies across the project depending upon the geology. It can range from artesian conditions (i.e. water above ground surface) to much deeper water table below the ground surface and in some areas a water table being below the proposed excavations. It is expected that construction of projects by ONxpress will require the management and removal of groundwater from underground excavations or structures that penetrate the water table, as well as accumulating precipitation and runoff water. For all excavations that penetrate the water table a seepage analyses will be carried out wherever necessary on temporary short term construction excavations and may also be carried out on long term (operational) permanent water management structures in order to determine the volume, rate and quality of water (groundwater and runoff water) to be taken (pumped) and then discharged.
11.1Identification of Locations that Require Water Management and Water Control
Different types of construction activities there are anticipated to require dewatering and management of water are as follows:
Excavations for grade separations, where a road, railroad, or pathway is to be lowered below existing ground surface
Excavations for abutment and pier footings for a bridge
Excavations for any below-ground foundations for posts or structures (i.e., Overhead Catenary System)
Excavations for pedestrian tunnels
Excavations for retaining walls
Excavations for noise barrier walls
Excavations for building foundations
Construction of culverts for creeks or surface water drainage, etc
Deeper foundations for any works beyond that evaluated in this assessment, such as higher retaining walls, culverts, and line station buildings with below-grade portions
Areas where subsoils need to be removed, requiring deeper excavations below the groundwater level, such as removing soils with poor bearing capacity, or removing impacted soils, if discovered
Additional structures or works added to the RER3 work package
Potential deeper excavations for underground utilities lateral upgrades/relocations.
These types of construction activities are anticipated to require groundwater management as they are anticipated to be excavated below the water table at some locations, therefore, groundwater seepage will have to be manage during temporary constructions activities. In addition, long-term groundwater management may be required at some locations to manage groundwater during operations (i.e., drainage along a retaining wall).
Assessment of construction dewatering requirements is informed through the collection of relevant information and data, detail design inputs and construction methodologies, under the direction of Project Co’s Hydrogeologist. As such, providing information related to anticipated dewatering locations, estimated dewatering volumes and applicable permitting requirements will change as design advances. The details of the volume of water and quality of water to be managed from these various types of construction will be provided in Site Specific Environmental Management plans (EMP). In addition, permitting requirements will also be provided in the Site Specific EMPs. The estimated volumes of water are subject to change and will be updated as detail designs advance, and as additional information is available. As additional hydrogeologic information become available initial assumptions can be confirmed regarding construction methods and approaches.
11.2Water Taking Approach
There are four types of water taking that can be associated with the identified construction sites for this Project which are described as routine water taking, short-term and long-term water takings, as follows:
Routine water taking refers to the removal of groundwater and precipitation volumes less than 50,000 L per day
Short-term, or temporary construction dewatering, is the removal of groundwater seepage or storm water that accumulates on a property during construction excavation works with water taking volumes over 50,000 L per day
Long-term, or operational water taking, is the removal of groundwater contribution to a sub-drain system of permanent structures on a continuous basis
The need for a groundwater pumping test as part of the investigation program will be required at select areas of the project. The need for a pumping test will be evaluated based on the following aspects:
Whether or not a proposed structure is to be built into, or near an aquifer
Hydrogeological conditions of the aquifer and adjacent areas
Groundwater level information
Reliability of available information.
11.3Water Discharge Approach
Dewatering discharge water will be managed in accordance to applicable regulations, site specific approvals, and best management practices, pertaining to the following:
Water discharge location
Water quantity limitations
Water temperature, quality and treatment requirements (on-site)
Haulage of water to an off-site treatment and disposal site, if necessary, and in accordance with applicable regulations
Additional environmental protection measures as required, such as erosion and sediment control, protection of adjacent environmentally sensitive areas, species at risk, water supply wells or surface water intakes for water supply
Source water protection requirements
Environmental monitoring requirements, whether captured in regulations, site-specific approvals, or working agreements with landowners and stakeholders in the area.
In some cases, multiple parties may be engaged in dewatering operations in the same area, such as other developers constructing below-ground works near a Metrolinx site, or other property owners maintaining buildings with active dewatering systems for basements. Where this is the case, ONxpress will develop working relationships with other property owners and stakeholders as applicable to administering jointly agreed-upon dewatering discharge and water management, management plans, including monitoring requirements and responsibilities, as guided by Metrolinx.
The water discharge approach will depend on the magnitude and duration of the water taking and discharge required, according to the following generalized scenarios:
Temporary Routine Small Water Takings (Routine Discharge Plan) (Temporary water takings and discharges of less than 50,000 L/day, such as for construction dewatering).
Temporary Water Takings in Excess of 50,000 L/day, under Authorization of an Environmental Activity Sector Registry (EASR): An EASR will be registered with MECP.
Temporary Water Takings in Excess of 50,000 L/day, for Consumptive Uses During Construction: An EASR may also be registered for select consumptive uses of water during construction, as long as the water taking, and water uses, adhere to the generic requirements outlined in O. Reg. 63/16, as well as any further stipulations in the site-specific hydrogeological assessment report.
Temporary Water Takings in Excess of 400,000 L/day, under Authorization of a Permit-to-Take-Water (PTTW): A PTTW will be obtained from the MECP.
Ongoing Long-Term Operational Water Takings in Excess of 50,000 L/day, under Authorization of a Permit-to-Take-Water (PTTW): A PTTW will be obtained from the MECP to authorize any ongoing water taking (groundwater or surface water), in excess of 400,000 L/day, taken by active means (pumping).
Dewatering
In accordance with the Environmental Protection Act, construction dewatering in excess of 50,000 L/day requires authorization through an Environmental Activity Sector Registry (EASR), through the Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Conservation, and Parks (MECP), as per O. Reg. 63/16.
Construction dewatering at any given location in excess of 400,000 L/day requires procurement of a Category 3 Permit-to-Take-Water (PTTW) from the MECP. Long-term (operational) pumping of groundwater for groundwater control also requires a PTTW. Management of surface water, through active (pumping) or passive (gravity flow) means does not require MECP authorization, however, will occur in accordance with O. Reg. 64/16.
As per the July 1, 2021 amendment to the Environmental Protection Act, it is now possible to authorize construction dewatering for groundwater control under an Environmental Activity Sector Registry (EASR), up to an unlimited amount Site-wide, so long as the total amount per source location (excavation) does not exceed 400,000 L/day, and the zone of influence of multiple source locations do not overlap while dewatering is occurring. An EASR is registered online with the MECP; no formal review is required by the MECP, however the proponent will prepare a hydrogeological assessment report, prepare and adhere to an environmental monitoring and mitigation plan, and adhere to the requirements of O. Reg. 63/16. Therefore, construction dewatering at multiple sites may be registered under one EASR, as long as construction dewatering at each site is less than 400,000 L/day, given that sites are sufficiently far apart that the zone of influence of dewatering will not overlap.
In addition to the applicable guidelines and regulations this will all be managed in compliance with the Groundwater Management and Dewatering Plan EMP.
At each site, where construction dewatering is deemed necessary, by a qualified professional, an environmental monitoring and mitigation program will need to be developed and implemented pre-construction phase, during the construction phase, and in some cases also during long-term operation phase. Based on the results of the hydrogeological assessments at each site, construction dewatering requirements will be refined, and groundwater quality is to be evaluated to determine water treatment (if required) and disposal requirements.
The environmental monitoring program for dewatering discharge, where necessary, will include monitoring water takings (pumping rates), daily visual examination of the construction effluent for water clarity, the presence of any sheen, foam, or odour, and additional more comprehensive water quality samples to verify compliance to applicable water quality criteria based on the discharge location (i.e. storm, sanitary, or conveyance overland back to the natural environment). Sewer capacity may need to be assessed, in order to determine if additional sewer upgrades are required to handle the volume of water to be discharged. There may also be other construction projects occurring in the area, also looking to dispose of water into the sanitary or storm sewers. Drainage from the proposed sites may be discharged either to trackside ditches, adjacent watercourses with appropriate setbacks (i.e. 30 meters as per O. Reg. 63/16), storm sewers, or sanitary sewers, pending appropriate water treatment, and suitability of the discharge location to receive the quantity of water to be discharged.
Protection of Nearby Groundwater Users
If there are private water well and / or surface water users in close proximity to select sites then a private well / surface water user monitoring program and mitigation plan would be necessary. The monitoring and mitigation plan will include documenting any private water well or surface water users within 250 meters of the Site, or within the maximum construction dewatering zone of influence, if greater, as well as consideration for any surface water users downstream of work areas which could potentially be affected by the work. The zone of influence (ZOI) is the extent of the area where the groundwater level may be lowered on account of construction dewatering or long-term water management. This effort will require door-to-door visits to such groundwater or surface water users, or other means to make owner contact, assessment of water supply systems, and a determination of potential impacts, all of which will guide a future decision on the need for ongoing monitoring and / or mitigation. Monitoring and mitigation requirements for private well users shall meet or exceed the requirements of O. Reg. 63/16 for sites where an EASR is registered, and these requirements are considered a best practice for sites where construction dewatering does not warrant registering an EASR. O. Reg. 64/16 stipulates requirements to prevent adverse impacts to nearby surface water features, with implications to nearby surface water users.
12.Geo-Environmental Design Approach
12.1Geo-Environmental Soil Quality
The findings of Geo-Engineering investigations that will be reported in site-specific Geo-Engineering Factual Data reports will provide the subsurface geo-environmental quality of soil and bedrock (if encountered). The geo-environmental in situ soil (and bedrock) quality will be compared to the applicable standards and limits set out on the following regulations:
-Ontario Regulation (O. Reg.) 153/04: Records of Site Conditions, for due diligence purposes and to set the Geo-Environmental subsurface conditions
-O. Reg. 406/19: On-Site and Excess Soil Management; for beneficial reuse onsite and excess soil management purposes
-O. Reg. 347: General Wastes; for waste management purposes where soils are being considered as waste.
The applicable quality standards are selected based on the site conditions (i.e., proximity to environmentally sensitive areas, water bodies, and supply wells, soil type, depth to water table, etc.) and also the current land use (e.g., existing railway land use is considered as industrial, commercial, community (ICC)).
Excavated soils that exceed the applicable Site Condition Standards (SCS for ICC Land Use) is considered as waste based on the definition of the Ontario Regulation (O. Reg.) 406/19 and can be disposed offsite as waste per Waste Diversion and Management Plan (WDMP). These materials may also be reused onsite in accordance with the Soil and Excavated Management Plan (SEMMP) and the associated site-specific WDMP and SEMMP plans.
Soils that meet the applicable SCS for ICC Land Use, can be reused onsite in accordance with the SEMMP and the associated site-specific SEMMP. In accordance with the SEMMP the reuse of these soils may actually be directed to other parts of the Project as backfilling or grading materials if they meet the geotechnical specifications.
The reuse of these soils will also be subject to accepted geotechnical specifications as fill materials for the Project.
12.2Geo-Environmental Groundwater Quality
The findings of Geo-Engineering investigations will also provide the subsurface geo-environmental quality of the groundwater. The geo-environmental in situ groundwater quality will be compared to the applicable standards set out on the following regulations:
-O. Reg. 153/04: Records of Site Conditions, for due diligence purposes and to set the Geo-Environmental subsurface conditions.
The applicable quality standards are selected based on the site conditions (i.e., proximity to environmentally sensitive areas, water bodies, and supply wells, soil type, depth to water table, etc.) and also the current land use (e.g., existing railway land use is considered as industrial, commercial, community (ICC)).
The applicable sewer use by-law, Provincial Water Quality Objectives (PWQO), or Ontario Drinking Water Quality Standards (ODWQS) if construction water management is required as discussed below and in more detail in Section 11 above.
The environmental quality of groundwater extracted during construction will be assessed based on the potential discharge options at that location such as municipal sanitary or storm sewers or surface water bodies for the development of permits.
The discharge of this water will be dependent on the meeting the applicable discharge standards or the applicable discharge authority (municipality and/or MECP).
Discharge and treatment options will be conducted in accordance with the Groundwater Management and Dewatering Plan (GWMDP) and the associated site-specific GWMDP.
12.3Corrosivity and Sulfate Attack
The corrosion potential (the aggressiveness rate) of the soils on the steel and the potential for sulphate attack on the concrete will be evaluated based on the results of the detailed geotechnical study at the plans and specifications stage and in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C105-A21.5 and CSA/CAN A23.1, respectively.
13.Pavement Design Approach
Pavement design aims to determine the structural thickness required to provide adequate performance for the anticipated traffic while providing adequate frost protection. This dimensioning is also used to determine the different materials making up the pavement structure.
Upon completion of the field work and laboratory testing, the coring/ boreholes results, and laboratory/environmental test results will be synthesized in concise tables, graphs and drawings. For pavement investigations, the traffic data (current and anticipated traffic volumes and percentage heavy vehicles, to be supplied by the Client) will be analyzed to determine the number of Equivalent Single Axle Loads (ESALs) on the existing roadways, and the ESALs projected for the pavements. The input parameters for the design lane ESAL calculations will derive from MTO publication MI-183 ‘Adaptation and Verification of the AASHTO Pavement Design Guide for Ontario Conditions’ and ‘Procedures for Estimating Traffic Loads for Pavement Design, 1995’.
For road/laneway reconstruction and resurfacing, a pavement condition surveys will be conducted in general accordance with ASTM D 6433(Standard Practice for Roads and Parking Lots Pavement Condition Index Surveys), supplemented by the Ontario Ministry of Transportation Manual for Condition Rating of Flexible Pavements (SP-022) and Condition Rating for Rating for Rigid Pavement (SP-026). Photographs of significant distresses features will be taken to include them in the report.
The roadway pavement structures will be designed according to the standards of the applicable Municipal and Road Authorities and are appropriate for the site-specific geotechnical conditions. OPSS will be followed in case of absence of Municipal Standards.
Any existing pavement damaged or altered due to construction activity will be replaced with new pavement structure in accordance with municipal or Ontario provincial standard.
In any case if the road has to open to traffic before laying the surface asphalt course, it will be confirmed that the required pavement structure has been laid.
Detour within project limit will be evaluated with Good Ride Condition Rating (RCR) and Good Pavement Condition Rating (PCR) as explained in the Ministry of Transportation, Ontario (MTO) guidelines for the condition rating of flexible pavements for municipalities (SP-022), and designed, evaluated, and maintained for carrying detoured traffic and construction vehicles for the designed period of use.
The field and laboratory test data will be used to determine the current conditions and structural capacity of the existing roadway pavements. The remaining life will be determined using the 1993 AASHTO Guide for the Design of Pavement Structures, as amended in 1998, and using the Ontario Ministry of Transportation MI-183 report Adaptation and Verification of AASHTO Pavement Design Guide for Ontario Conditions (Revised on March 19, 2008). Pavement design will be developed for new construction and any structural improvement (strengthening) required to extend the pavement service life.
As recommended by the AASHTO design method, a multi-layer analysis is carried out in order to define the minimum thicknesses of asphalt mix, foundation and subgrade required. The thickness of the asphalt layer is designed in 5 mm increments, and that of the foundations and the foundation and the subgrade in 25 mm increments.
For Danforth Road pavement and Midland Avenue, the site will be rehabilitated/reconstructed accordance with City of Toronto “Pavement Design and Rehabilitation Guideline, Second Edition, 2019” as required.
14.Materials Design Approach
14.1Track
Grading
According to the PA (Part C Schedule C-6 Article B.3.3) grading including construction and management of excavated material including earth and rock excavation and embankment should be carried out with MTO, OPSS 206 – Grading for Earth and Rock Excavation.
Subgrade
As per the PA (Part C Schedule C-6 Article B.3.4), the subgrade should meet the standards for suitability of materials, compaction and stability as follows:
MTO, OPSS 212 – Earth Borrow
MTO, OPSS 501 – Compacting.
Ballast &Sub ballast
As per the PA (Part C Schedule C-6 Article B.3.5), sub-ballast material will meet OPSS.MUNI 1010, Granular B Type II and in accordance with the following:
Placement of sub-ballast should be carried out to MTO, OPSS 501 – Compacting for granular material
Minimum depth of sub-ballast should be 305mm in Mainline Track or larger depth as determined by analysis.
In accordance with the PA Part C Schedule C-6 Article B.5.3(a)(iv) ballast is to comply with GO Transit Crushed Rock Track Ballast Specifications.
Ballast mats conforming with the requirements of the MGGDRBS are to be provided on all areas of the track that are exposed to train loadings that are waterproofed as a part of the Initial Works shall be provided [PA Part C Schedule C-6 Article C.14.15(e)(iv)].
14.2Civil Works
Civil works that may require materials design and input include pavement for parking lots and roadways, grading, track and municipal drainage. The materials to be used in the project will be in accordance with the PA required Standards and Codes identified in Section 3.1.
14.3Civil Structures
Civil structures that may require materials design and input include civil structures supporting only rail, railway traffic collision protection, public boulevards and utilities. The materials to be used in the project will be in accordance with the PA required Standards and Codes identified in Section 3.1.
14.4Facilities
Facilities that may require materials design and input include public boulevards. The materials to be used in the project will be in accordance with the PA required Standards and Codes identified in Section 3.1.
15.References
15.1Basis of Design Reports
The following applicable OnCorr Basis of Design / Design Criteria reports are referenced, and which specifically support or is supported by this Basis of Design / Design Criteria report.
Table 12: Reference Design Basis Reports
Document No.
Report Name
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00002
Basis of Design – Rail Facilities
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00003
Basis of Design – Renovation Stations
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00004
Basis of Design – Traction Power Facilities
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00005
Basis of Design – Union Station
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00006
Basis of Design – New Stations
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00007
Basis of Design – Corridors – Cable Containment
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00008
Basis of Design – Corridors – Civil Infrastructure Line Works
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00009
Basis of Design – Grade Separations
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00010
Basis of Design – Corridors – Track and Track Alignment
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00011
Basis of Design – Utilities
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00013
Basis of Design – Environmental
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00014
Basis of Design – Electrical Grounding and Bonding

15.2Environmental Management Plans
The following OnCorr Environmental Management Plans have been prepared for the project and referenced in the Basis of Design Report.
Table 13: Reference Environmental Management Reports
Document No.
Report Name
RER3-CJV-PW-0000-SWS-ENV-PLN-00006
Groundwater Management and Dewatering Plan
RER3-CJV-PW-0000-SWS-ENV-PLN-00007
Well Decommissioning and Protection Plan
RER3-CJV-PW-0000-SWS-ENV-PLN-00004
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
RER3-CJV-PW-0000-SWS-ENV-PLN-00001
Soil and Excavated Management Plan
RER3-CJV-PW-0000-SWS-ENV-PLN-00017
Waste Diversion and Management Plan
15.3Referenced Literature
Al-Mhaidib, A. I. (2007, July). Efficiency of pile groups in clay under different loading rates. In The Seventeenth International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference. OnePetro.
Al-Shayea, N. (2006). Pullout capacity of block anchor in unsaturated sand. In Unsaturated Soils 2006 (pp. 403-414). Briaud (1992)
American National Standards Institute. (2021). Geotechnical and Foundation Design Considerations. Retrieved from https://www.ansi.org/
ASTM, G. (1987). American Society for Testing and Materials Standards. Standard terminology relating to erosion and wear, Annual book of ASTM Standards
Baguelin, F. (1978). The pressuremeter and foundation engineering. Trans. Tech. Publications.
Baker, C. L., Lahti, L. R., & Roumbanis, D. C. (1998). Urban geology of Toronto and surrounding area. Urban Geology of Canadian Cities. Edited by: PF Karrow, 42, 323-352.
Barden, L. (1962). Distribution of contact pressure under foundations. Geotechnique, 12(3), 181-198.
Boulanger, R. W., & Idriss, I. M. (2008). Closure to “Liquefaction Susceptibility Criteria for Silts and Clays” by Ross W. Boulanger and IM Idriss. Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 134(7), 1027-1028.
Bowles, J. E. (1996). Foundation Analysis and Design, The McGrawHill Companies. Inc., Singapore.
Canadian Geotechnical Society (2006). Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual

Canadian Standards Association. (2019). Canadian highway bridge design code (CAN/CSA Standard No.S6-14). Retrieved from https://www.csagroup.org/canadian-highway-bridge-design-code/
Casagrande, A. (1932). Research on the Atterberg limits of soils. Public roads, 13(8), 121-136.
Code, O. B. (2012). Ontario Building Code. Municipal By-Laws and National Fire Protection Codes.
Chen, J. R. (2004). Axial behavior of drilled shafts in gravelly soils. Cornell University.
City of Toronto. (2022). Toronto Green Standards Version 4 - COT TGsc4
City of Toronto. (2006). Wet Weather Flow Management Guidelines
Das, B. M., & Sobhan, K. (2014). Principles of Geotechnical Engineering. 8th edition. Cengage Learning. CT, USA
Environmental Protection Act, O Reg 63/16, Environmental Activity and Sector Registration
FHWA, N. (2009). Design and Construction of Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes – Volume I & 2 - NHI Courses No. 132042 and 132043

FHWA, N. (2005). Micropile design and construction–reference manual. Federal Highway Administration-National Highway Institute (FHWA NHI). US Department of Transportation, McLean, Va. Publication No. FHWA NHI-05-039.

FHWA, N. (2009). Technical Manual for Design and Construction of Road Tunnels – Civil Elements. Publication No. FWHA-NHI-10-034

Hewitt, D. F. (1972). Paleozoic geology of southern Ontario. Ontario, Division of Mines.
Holtz, R. D., Kovacs, W. D., & Sheahan, T. C. (1981). An introduction to geotechnical engineering (Vol. 733). Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall. Idriss and Boulanger (2008)
Infrastructure Ontario. (2018). Site Investigation Guidelines for Due Diligence and Design Purposes, Social and Civil Infrastructures, Version 7
International Standards Organization. (2017). Geotechnical investigation and testing — Identification and classification of soil (ISO 14688-1). Retrieved from https://www.iso.org/standard/66345.html
Kulhawy, F. H., & Chen, J. R. (2007). Discussion of “drilled shaft side friction in gravelly soils” by Kyle M. Rollins, Robert J. Clayton, Rodney C. Mikesell, and Bradford C. Blaise. Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 133(10), 1325-1328. Lefebvre (1981)
Leroueil, S., Kabbaj, M., Tavenas, F., & Bouchard, R. (1985). Stress–strain–strain rate relation for the compressibility of sensitive natural clays. Géotechnique, 35(2), 159-180. Liang et al. (2009)
Lunne, T., Berre, T., & Strandvik, S. (1997). Sample disturbance effects in soft low plastic Norwegian clay. In Symposium on Recent Developments in Soil and Pavement Mechanics CAPES-Fundacao Coordenacao do Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior; CNPq-Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico a Tecnologico; FAPERJ-Fundacao de Ampora a Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro; FINEP-Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos. Ontario Geologic Survey (OGS) Surficial Geology of Southern Ontario (2003)
Metrolinx Design Standards. (2019). DS-02. Universal Design Standard
Metrolinx Design Standards. (2020). DS-03. Wayfinding Design Standard
Metrolinx Design Standards. (2019). DS-04. Go Station Architecture Design Standard
Metrolinx Design Standards. (2021). DS-05. Sustainable Design Standard
Metrolinx Design Standards. (2021). DS-25. Climate Change Informed Data Standard
Metrolinx Design Standards. (2022). DS-28. Noise Barrier Design
Metrolinx. (2016). Design Criteria Manual – Metrolinx Light Rail Transit
Metrolinx. (2018). GO Track Standards RC-0506-02TRK Metrolinx. (2019). Metrolinx Environmental Guide for Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Assessment Metrolinx. (2018). Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges & Structures, RC-0506-04STR Metrolinx. (2019). Metrolinx Environmental Guide for Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Assessment Metrolinx. (2018). Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges & Structures, RC-0506-04STR
Metrolinx. (2020). Metrolinx Guide to Engaging with Indigenous Nations
Metrolinx. (2020). Metrolinx Vegetation Guideline, MX-DGL-02
Ministry of Transportation Ontario. (2021). MTO Structural Manual
National Building code of Canada. (2020)
Ontario Building Code, O Reg. 245/11. Registrations under Part II.2 of the Environmental Protection Act – General. Ontario Building Code, O Reg. 245/11. Registrations under Part II.2 of the Environmental Protection Act – General.
Ontario Building Code, O Reg. 406/19. On-Site and Excess Soil Management
Ontario Building Code, O Reg. 153/04. Records of Site Condition Ontario Building Code, O Reg.347. General – Waste Management Ontario Occupational Health and Safety Act. (2022). Retrieved from https://www.ontario.ca/document/guide-occupational-health-and-safety-act Ontario Building Code, O Reg.347. General – Waste Management Ontario Occupational Health and Safety Act. (2022). Retrieved from https://www.ontario.ca/document/guide-occupational-health-and-safety-act
Ontario Occupational Health and Safety Act. (2022). O Reg.213/91. Construction Projects
Ontario Water Resources Act, O Reg.387/04. Permit to take water
Ontario Water Resources Act, O Reg.903. Well Decommissioning
Pells, P. J. N., & Turner, R. M. (1979). Elastic solutions for the design and analysis of rock-socketed piles. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 16(3), 481-487. Post-tensioning institute (PTI) – Recommendations for prestressed rock and soil anchors (PTI DC35.1-14).
USACE. (1991). Design of pile foundations. US Army Corps of Engineers Engineering Manual EM 1110-2-2906.
U.S. Navy, Naval Facilities Engineering Command. (1986). NAVFAC Design Manual 7.01 Soil Mechanics Sharpe, D. R. (1980). Quaternary Geology of Toronto and Surrounding Area; Ontario Geological Survey Preliminary Map P. 2204, Geological Series. Scale, 1(100), 000. Son and Cording (2005)Sharpe, D. R. (1980). Quaternary Geology of Toronto and Surrounding Area; Ontario Geological Survey Preliminary Map P. 2204, Geological Series. Scale, 1(100), 000. Son and Cording (2005)
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawing:
OPSD 3090.101 Foundation Frost Depths for Southern Ontario, November 2005.
OPSD 3101.150 Walls Abutment, Backfill Minimum Granular Requirement, November 2005.
OPSD 3121.150 Walls Retaining, Backfill Minimum Granular Requirement, November 2005.
Son, M., & Cording, E. J. (2005). Estimation of building damage due to excavation-induced ground movements. Journal of geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering, 131(2), 162-177. Terzaghi and Peck (1967)
Stark, T.D., Husain, M. 2013. Empirical Correlations: Drained Shear Strength for Slope Stability Analyses, Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, ASCE, 139-6: 853-862
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority. (2012). Stormwater Management Criteria, TRCA SWC
Transport Canada- Standards Respecting Pipeline Crossings Under Railways. (June 21, 2000). TC E-10
Watt, A. K. (1955). Pleistocene geology and groundwater resources of the township of North York. York County, Annual Report.
Youd, T. L., & Idriss, I. M. (2001). Liquefaction resistance of soils: summary report from the 1996 NCEER and 1998 NCEER/NSF workshops on evaluation of liquefaction resistance of soils. Journal of geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering, 127(4), 297-313.



Appendix A
Abbreviations



Table A: List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Name
AASHTO
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Official
ACI
American Concrete Institute
ANSI/AWWA
American National Standards Institute / American Water Works Association
AREMA
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials
ASD
Allowable Stress Design
BAR
Barrie – Newmarket GO railway line
BIM
Building Information Model
C5
Schedule C-5 of the Project Agreement
C6
Schedule C-6 of the Project Agreement
CC
Construction Contractor
CCDG
Canadian Construction Documents Committee
CDS
Construction Document Development
CIAR
Construction Impact Assessment Report
CFEM
Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual
CHBDC
Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code
CJV
Construction Joint Venture
CN
The Canadian National Railway Company
COC
Contaminants of Concern
COPC
Contaminants of Potential Concern
COT
City of Toronto
CPR
Canadian Pacific Railway
CPT
Cone Penetration Test
C.R.C.
Consolidated Regulations of Canada
CSA
Canadian Standards Association
DDD
Design Development Definition
DDS
Design Development Submission
EA
Environmental Assessment
EAS
Existing Adjacent Structures
EASR
Environmental Activity and Sector Registry
ECA
Environmental Compliance Approval 
EMP
Environmental Management Plan
EJV
Engineering Joint Venture
EMS
Environmental Management System 
FE
Finite Element
FS
Factor of Safety
GIMP
Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan 
GIS
Geographic Information System
GSI
Geological Strength Index
GTA
Greater Toronto Area
GWMDP
Groundwater Management and Dewatering Plan
HSS
Hollow Structural Sections
ICC
Industrial, Commercial, Community
IFC
Issued for Construction
IFP
Issued for Permit
IFT
Issued for Tender
IO
Infrastructure Ontario 
IS
International System of Units
IOP
Infrastructure Operation Plan 
KIT
Kitchener – Weston-Guelph GO railway line
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LE
Limited Equilibrium
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LOD
Level of Development
LOI
Level of Information
LOS
Level of Service
LRFD
Load and Resistance Factor Design
LSE
Lakeshore East GO railway line
LSW
Lakeshore West GO railway line
MAPP
Metrolinx Assent Protection Plan
MDE
Maximum Design Earthquake
MECP
Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Conservation, and Parks
MGGDRBS
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures
MSE
Mechanically Stabilised Earth Retaining Structures
MTO
Ministry of Transportation Ontario
MTQ
Ministère des Transports du Québec
MX
Metrolinx
NAVFAC
Navy Facilities
NBCC
National Building Code of Canada
OBC
Ontario Building Code
OCS
Overhead Catenary System
ODE
Operating Design Earthquake
OPSD
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawing
OPSS
Ontario Provincial Standard Specifications
ORMAC
Oak Ridges Moraine Aquifer Complex
PA
Project Agreement
PCB
Polychlorinated Biphenyls
PLAA
Permits, Licences, Approvals and Agreements
PS
Paralleling Station
PSHA
Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Analysis
PSOS
Project Specific Output Specifications
PTI
Post-tensioning institute
PTTW
Permit to Take Water
PZOI
Project Zone of Influence
QP
Qualified Person
RCD
Reference Concept Design
RER
GO Regional Express Rail
RIC
Richmond Hill – Bala GO railway line
RQD
Rock Quality Designation
RSC
Revised Statutes of Canada
RSO
Revised Statutes of Ontario
SC
Statutes of Canada
SEMMP
Soil and Excavated Management Plan
SI
Statutory Instruments
SI
International System of Units
SLS
Serviceability Limit State
SOR
Statutory Orders and Regulations
SOW
Scope of Work
SPA
Site Plan Control Approval
SPT
Standard Penetration Testing
SPMDD
Standard Proctor Maximum Dry Density
SWS
Switching Station
TEDI
Thermal Energy Demand Intensity
TGS
Toronto Green Standards
TRCA
Toronto Region Conservation Authority
TPAP
Transit Project Assessment Process
TPFs
Traction Power Facilities
TPSS
Traction Power Sub Station
TTC
Toronto Transit Commission
UCS
Unconfined Compressive Strength
ULS
Ultimate Limit State
USACE
US Army Corps of Engineers
USCS
Unified Soil Classification System
USEP
Union Station Expansion Project
USRC
Union Station Rail Corridor
WDMP
Waste Diversion and Management Plan
ZOI
Zone of Influence



Appendix B
Requirements Allocation for Geo-Engineering Design


Table B: Requirements Allocation for Geo-Engineering Design 
Source module
Num Heading
Primary Text
Applicable section(s) &
 Basis of Design Document Number
Engineering Lead Comments
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.1.47
Project Co shall submit designs for all Initial Works Geo-Technical Report in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001,Section 1.3
S-147 (DDS/CDS)
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.2.26
Project Co shall submit the Union Station Geotechnical Investigation Management Plan in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001,Section 1.3
Identified in C.14.9(f)(ii)A; specific submittals not listed in BoD. Submittal S-227
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.8.8
Project Co shall submit the Geo-engineering Reports – Track in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial
Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001,Section 1.3
S-807 (DDS/CDS)
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.8.12
Project Co shall submit the Geo-engineering Reports – Grade Separation in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001,Section 1.3
S-811 (DDS/CDS)
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.9.6
Project Co shall submit the Code Compliance Report in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001,Appendix B

Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.10.8
Project Co shall prepare and submit a Groundwater Management and Dewatering Plan in accordance with Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 7

Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.10.9
Project Co shall prepare and submit a Groundwater Management and Dewatering Implementation Report in accordance with Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 7, 8

Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.4 Project Co shall include the following Works Submittals for the New City of Toronto Infrastructure:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, All sections

Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.4 (a) Geotechnical report, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, All sections
S-147 (DDS/CDS)
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.4 (a) (i) environmental section for base conditions and for any alterations; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8

Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.4 (a) (ii) recommendations for construction based on ground conditions in conformance with Municipal Standards;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, All sections

Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.4 (b) pavement design report, for all road elements; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.1.3
(a) For Section C.14 – Union Station of this Schedule C-6, unless the context requires otherwise, the direction “north” should be interpreted as the direction perpendicular to the 1929 Retaining Wall and facing the Union Station Headhouse with all other cardinal directions in this Schedule C-6 being derived from this interpretation of the direction north.
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(d) Project Co shall prepare and submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure geotechnical reports for the Initial Works (each, an “Initial Works Geo-Technical Report”). Each Initial Works Geo-Technical Reports shall include:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 1.3
S-147 (DDS/CDS)
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) Boring Location Plan (BLP), Schedule of Borings (SOB), and Site Specific Work Plan (SSWP) as follows:
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) A. the BLP shall be in electronic format (text-searchable PDF and CAD file in accordance with Contracting Authority’s CADD Standards), at a scale no smaller than 1:10000 and no larger than 1:1000, with the planned northing, easting and elevation of each test boring, test pit, cone penetration test, and other field testing or sounding location; and
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. the SOB shall include:
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. i. the locations, elevations and depths of all proposed test borings;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. ii. the locations, elevations and depths of all test pits;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. iii. the locations, elevations and depths of all cone penetration tests;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. iv. the locations, elevations and depths of any other field testing or soundings;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. v. proposed soil and rock sampling types and field testing;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vi. special installations; and
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. any other pertinent details, presented in a tabular format;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. (i) a Design Brief based on available geo-engineering information;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. (ii) fill types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.6, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. (iii) compaction requirements for subgrade;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. (iv) bore log and data drawing;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. (v) a Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. (vi) typical installation details;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. (vii) permanent and temporary slopes including slope stability analysis of all slopes supporting the New Project Co Infrastructure and the New Third Party Infrastructure;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(i) B. vii. (viii) consolidation-preloading;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.1, 6.3.3
Consolidation will be tested as discussed in the mentioned sections. For preloading, the need is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(ii) requirements with respect to new or existing Civil Structures, including:
N/A
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(ii) A. foundation types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.3, 6.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(ii) B. foundation pile system(s) including permanent anchors, calculated settlements, bearing pressures, influence on other structures, and other similar concepts;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.3, 6.4, 6.10, 6.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(ii) C. up-lift and buoyancy design;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.9
Design to account for buoyancy is completed by structural
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(ii) D. frost protection;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.7

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(ii) E. protection requirements for buildings and Utilities;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(ii) F. subgrade treatment - seepage blankets, u-fill and mud slabs;
N/A
We agree these will be added to geo-engineering design reports as needed to support construction.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(ii) G. underpinning; and
N/A
The need is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iii) requirements with respect to pavements and Track beds, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iii) A. pavement types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iii) B. pavement design report;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0
Pavement design will be in separate design memos for DDS and may be included in the geotechnical design reports (CDS)
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iii) C. subgrade drainage; and
N/A
not geo-engineering design scope, civil design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iii) D. Track fill and backfill handling and disposal;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iv) requirements with respect to excavation support systems, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iv) A. design criteria with respect to pressures, movement, soil parameters, types of systems for structure protection, and other similar concepts;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iv) B. ground water control requirements;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5.5, 7.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iv) D. cross-sections of critical and typical areas (all details);
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iv) G. preloading requirements;
N/A
The need is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iv) H. base stability with respect to soft soils or ground water uplift; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.9, 7.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(iv) I. temporary slopes;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(v) requirements with respect to dewatering systems, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5.5, 7.0
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(v) A. water level requirements during the performance of the Initial Works;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5.5, 7.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(v) B. quality and quantity of groundwater to be discharged;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 7.0, 8.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(v) C. groundwater treatment and collection systems;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 7.0, 8.0
Collection systems also falls under civil works and will be designed/selected by proprietary subcontractor
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(v) D. Permits, Licences and Approvals including any Permit to Take Water from the MECP and the Sewer Use By-law;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 7.0, 8.0
Also falls under civil works
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(v) G. assessment of settlement due to dewatering;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.11, 7.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) requirements with respect to geotechnical instrumentation and monitoring, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) A. a Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) B. typical installation details;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) C. location / number of instruments;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) D. response levels (review and alert levels);
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) F. response action plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) G. schedule for instrument installation, taking baseline readings, and monitoring frequencies and durations;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) H. measures and specific instrumentation and monitoring requirements for protecting existing adjacent structures and heritage buildings;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) I. instrument decommissioning schedule; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific details to be included in report at CDS and coordinated with construction schedule
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vi) J. data acquisition, receiving, transmitting, collecting and visualization system; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific details to be included in report at CDS and coordinated with construction schedule
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vii) geo-environmental requirements, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vii) A. review existing geo-environmental information-prepare an environmental baseline and plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vii) B. details for additional geo-environmental investigations;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vii) C. soil and groundwater quality;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vii) D. identify unusual/poor soil or groundwater conditions-prepare risk assessment plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vii) E. soil and groundwater disposal management requirements; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (d)
(vii) F. soil stratigraphy.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (e)
(e) Project Co shall incorporate train live load surcharge for geotechnical design of earthworks, and other below-grade structures directly or indirectly subject to railroad loading. The train live load surcharge shall be based on Cooper E-80 loading in compliance with the AREMA Manual, Volume 2 – Structures, unless otherwise superseded by requirements identified in the GTTS.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (f)
(f) Project Co shall prepare and submit a Boring Location Plan (BLP), Schedule of Borings (SOB), and Site- Specific Work Plan (SSWP) in compliance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (g)
(g) Project Co shall manage excess soils from subsurface investigation activities in accordance with Applicable Law and Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations.
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.3 (h)
(h) Project Co shall ensure field and laboratory testing of geotechnical samples complies with the MTO Laboratory Testing Manual and ASTM standards. Laboratory testing of soil and rock samples shall be performed by an MTO RAQS approved consultant, registered to provide services to MTO in Engineering Materials Testing and Evaluation for the specialty category covering the testing to be performed.
N/A
Geo-Investigations scope 
Has been identified as a derogation
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.5.3 (c)
(vii) Project Co shall prepare a response action plan, which shall consist of preliminary methods and means to respond to various Review Level and Alert Level scenarios based on types of geotechnical instruments that indicate Review Level and Alert Levels.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.11, 6.12
Site specific details to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.5.3 (c)
(viii) Project Co shall include in the GIMP all measures and specific instrumentation and monitoring requirements for protecting Existing Adjacent Structures which are within the PZOI as defined by Project Co.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.11, 6.12
Site specific details to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (a)
(a) Project Co shall submit an initial set of Record Drawings, As-Built Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals (“Record Drawings, As-Built Drawings and Operations and Maintenance Manuals”) to Contracting Authority for review in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
N/A
Not Geo-engineering design scope
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (g)
(g) Project Co shall provide engineering documentation and Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals for any Third Party Infrastructure in compliance with the requirements of the third party.
N/A
Not Geo-engineering design scope
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.1 (b)
(b) Design of all elements of the various system designs shall be developed to operate reliably in the environment in which they are installed. Project Co shall design all systems elements to integrate with the environmental conditions present including ambient temperature range, humidity, precipitation and other environmental factors that will impact operation. 
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.3 (a)
(a) Project Co shall develop and implement nomenclature (“Nomenclature”) as a means of identifying, labeling and tracking equipment and assets to comply with this Schedule C-6 and Part B-3 –Fixed Asset Maintenance. The Nomenclature shall adhere to the defined terms under the Project Agreement to the extent applicable and shall be developed to allow for easy identification of System and Facility elements to support operational decisions, maintenance activities, and alarm management.
N/A
program wide
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.3 (b)
(b) Project Co shall ensure the Nomenclature includes a method for system-wide labeling that includes Service Group, functional description of the element, and a unique sequential identification number, with the functional description containing information related to the type of element and being an alpha numeric designation to represent the specific field element based on the Project Co system architecture.
N/A
program wide
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.3 (c)
(c) The Nomenclature including the functional description codes, shall be documented in the Project Co EAIS and the Project Co MMIS.
N/A
program wide
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide all earthwork for track works in compliance with MTO OPSS 206 and AREMA Manual, Chapter 1, Part 1 – Roadbed. 
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(b) Project Co shall prepare and submit to Contracting Authority as part of the Design Development Submittals and the Construction Document Submittals a complete set of geotechnical design reports to Contracting Authority for the Initial Works in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure (the “Geo-engineering Reports – Track”). The Geo-engineering Reports – Track shall include reports of the following:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 1.3
S-807 (DDS/CDS)
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) general geo-engineering requirements, including:
N/A
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. Boring Location Plan (BLP), Schedule of Borings (SOB), and Site Specific Work Plan (SSWP) as follows:
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. i. the BLP shall be in electronic format (text-searchable PDF and CAD file in accordance with Contracting Authority’s CADD Standards), at a scale no smaller than 1:10000 and no larger than 1:1000, with the planned northing, easting and elevation of each test boring, test pit, cone penetration test, and other field testing or sounding location; and
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. ii. the SOB shall include:
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. ii. 1. the locations, elevations and depths of all proposed test borings;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. ii. 2. the locations, elevations and depths of all test pits;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. ii. 3. the locations, elevations and depths of all cone penetration tests;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. ii. 4. the locations, elevations and depths of any other field testing or soundings;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. ii. 5. proposed soil and rock sampling types and field testing;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. ii. 6. special installations; and
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) A. ii. 7. any other pertinent details, presented in a tabular format;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) B. a Design Brief based on available geo-engineering information;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) C. fill types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 10.0 

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) D. compaction requirements for subgrade;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 10.0 

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) E. bore log and data drawing;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) F. a Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) G. typical installation details;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) H. permanent and temporary slopes including slope stability analysis of all slopes supporting the New Project Co Infrastructure and the New Third Party Infrastructure;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(i) I. consolidation-preloading;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.1, 6.3.3
Consolidation will be tested as discussed in the mentioned sections. For preloading,the need is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(ii) requirements with respect to new or existing Civil Structures, including:
N/A
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(ii) A. foundation types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.3, 6.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(ii) B. foundation pile system(s) including permanent anchors, calculated settlements, bearing pressures, influence on other structures, and other similar concepts;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.3, 6.4, 6.10, 6.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(ii) C. up-lift and buoyancy design;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.9
Design to account for buoyancy is completed by structural
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(ii) D. frost protection;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.7

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(ii) E. protection requirements for buildings and Utilities;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(ii) F. subgrade treatment - seepage blankets, u-fill and mud slabs;
N/A
We agree these will be added to geo-engineering design reports as needed to support construction.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(ii) G. underpinning; and
N/A
The need is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iii) requirements with respect to pavements and Track beds, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 10.0 
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iii) A. pavement types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iii) B. pavement design report;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0
Pavement design will be in separate design memos for DDS and may be included in the geotechnical design reports (CDS)
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iii) C. subgrade drainage; and
N/A
Not geo-engineering design scope, civil design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iii) D. Track fill and backfill handling and disposal;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 8.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iv) requirements with respect to excavation support systems, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iv) A. design criteria with respect to pressures, movement, soil parameters, types of systems for structure protection, and other similar concepts;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.2, 6.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iv) B. ground water control requirements;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5.5, 7.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iv) D. cross-sections of critical and typical areas (all details);
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iv) G. preloading requirements;
N/A
The need is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iv) H. base stability with respect to soft soils or ground water uplift; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(iv) I. temporary slopes;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(v) requirements with respect to dewatering systems, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5.5, 10.0
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(v) A. water level requirements during the performance of the Initial Works;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5.5, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(v) B. quality and quantity of groundwater to be discharged;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(v) C. groundwater treatment and collection systems;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 10.0, 11.0
Collection systems also falls under civil works and will be designed/selected by proprietary subcontractor
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(v) D. Permits, Licences and Approvals including any Permit to Take Water from the MECP and the Sewer Use By-law;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 10.0, 11.0
Also falls under civil works
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(v) G. assessment of settlement due to dewatering;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) requirements with respect to geotechnical instrumentation and monitoring, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) A. a Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) B. typical installation details;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) C. location / number of instruments;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) D. response levels (review and alert levels);
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) F. response action plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) G. schedule for instrument installation, taking baseline readings, and monitoring frequencies and durations;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) H. measures and specific instrumentation and monitoring requirements for protecting existing adjacent structures and heritage buildings;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) I. instrument decommissioning schedule; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific details to be included in report at CDS and coordinated with construction schedule
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vi) J. data acquisition, receiving, transmitting, collecting and visualization system; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.12
Site specific details to be included in report at CDS and coordinated with construction schedule
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vii) geo-environmental requirements, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vii) A. review existing geo-environmental information-prepare an environmental baseline and plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vii) B. details for additional geo-environmental investigations;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vii) C. soil and groundwater quality;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vii) D. identify unusual/poor soil or groundwater conditions-prepare risk assessment plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vii) E. soil and groundwater disposal management requirements; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (b)
(vii) F. soil stratigraphy.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.1 (c)
(c) Project Co shall incorporate train live load surcharge for geotechnical design of earthworks, and other below-grade structures directly or indirectly subject to railroad loading. The train live load surcharge shall be based on Cooper E-80 loading in compliance with the AREMA Manual, Volume 2 – Structures, unless otherwise superseded by requirements identified in the GTTS.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.2 (a)
(a) Project Co shall prepare and submit a geotechnical investigation reports in compliance with this Schedule C-6.
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.2 (b)
(b) Project Co shall prepare and submit a Boring Location Plan (BLP), Schedule of Borings (SOB), and Site- Specific Work Plan (SSWP) in compliance with the requirements of this Schedule C-6. 
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.2 (c)
(c) Project Co shall manage excess soils from subsurface investigation activities in accordance with Applicable Law and Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations.
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.3.2 (d)
(d) Project Co shall ensure field and laboratory testing of geotechnical samples complies with the MTO Laboratory Testing Manual and ASTM standards. Laboratory testing of soil and rock samples shall be performed by an MTO RAQS approved consultant, registered to provide services to MTO in Engineering Materials Testing and Evaluation for the specialty category covering the testing to be performed.
N/A
Geo-Investigations scope 
Has been identified as a derogation
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) A. Design and Performance Requirements
N/A
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) A. i. Project Co shall ensure that all the roadway pavement structures conform to the standards of the applicable Municipal and Road Authorities and are appropriate for the site-specific geotechnical conditions.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) A. ii. In case of absence of Municipal Standards, Project Co shall comply as a minimum with the OPSS requirements related to pavement.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) A. iii. Project Co shall construct the pavement structure such that drainage complies with applicable Reference Documents. 
N/A
civil works
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) B. i. Project Co shall provide new pavement structures in compliance with Municipal Standards in all locations where the existing pavement structure is disturbed for the purpose of constructing the Initial Works.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) B. ii. Project Co shall be responsible for re-instating the pavement structure in compliance with Municipal Standards in all locations where the pavement structure has been altered for the purpose of constructing the Initial Works.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) B. iii. If any roads will be opened to public traffic and/or construction traffic prior to completion of the surface course paving, Project Co shall design the pavement such that the unfinished pavement can carry public traffic and/or construction traffic until the surface course is placed.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) B. iv. Project Co shall prepare and submit pavement design reports in accordance with the requirements of this Schedule C-6.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 1.3, 9.0
Pavement design will be in separate design memos for DDS and may be included in the geotechnical design reports
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) B. v. Project Co shall ensure that any existing or proposed temporary pavements that may be used for detouring during construction staging are, as a minimum, paved carriage way with Good Ride Condition Rating (RCR) and Good Pavement Condition Rating (PCR) as explained in the Ministry of Transportation, Ontario (MTO) guidelines for the condition rating of flexible pavements for municipalities (SP-022).), and designed, evaluated and maintained for carrying detoured traffic and construction vehicles for the designed period of use.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. i. Project Co shall provide asphalt pavements in accordance with OPSS guidelines including the following:
N/A
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. i. 1. OPSS 510 - Removal;
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. i. 2. OPSS 1103 – Emulsified Asphalt; and
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. i. 3. OPSS 1150 – Hot Mix Asphalt.
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. ii. Project Co shall provide asphalt pavements in accordance with ASTM guidelines including the following;
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. ii. 1. ASTM D242 – Standard Specification for Mineral Filler for Asphalt Mixtures; 
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. ii. 2. ASTM D692 – Standard Specification for Coarse Aggregate for Asphalt Paving Mixtures Pavements;
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. ii. 3. ASTM D979 – Standard Practice for Sampling Bituminous Paving Mixtures;
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. ii. 4. ASTM D995 – Standard Specification for Mixing Plants for Hot-Mixed, Hot-Laid Bituminous Paving Mixtures;
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. ii. 5. ASTM D1073 – Standard Specification for Fine Aggregate for Asphalt Paving Mixtures; and
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. ii. 6. ASTM D2027 – Standard Specification for Cutback Asphalt (Medium – Curing Type).
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. iii. Project Co shall construct asphalt pavements using procedures for heating materials, hauling, spreading, jointing, and compaction that conform to Ontario Provincial Standard Specification. 
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iii) C. iv. Project Co shall construct the Initial Works such that all joints are cleaned of dirt and other foreign material and are painted with a uniform, and continuous coating of OD SS-1 asphalt emulsion that complies with OPSS Form 1103. All joints shall be constructed to ensure a thorough and continuous band and to provide a smooth riding surface.
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iv) A. Project Co shall comply with the grading requirements of the relevant Municipal Standards or, in absence of such standards, applicable MTO OPSS/OPSD shall be used.
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iv) B. Project Co shall ensure that grading conforms to the requirements of Municipal Standards or OPSS.MUNI.206 for Initial Works within Municipal ROW.
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
 (iv) C. Project Co shall ensure that compaction conforms to the requirements of Municipal Standards or OPSS.MUNI.501 for Initial Works within Municipal ROW.
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(iii) A. Project Co shall reconstruct the Danforth Road pavement, including intersection at Midland Avenue as composite pavement to comply with 25-year design life as per City of Toronto standards.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0
Pavement design part of Geo-design, Reconstruct is part of construction
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(iii) B. Project Co shall reconstruct the Midland Avenue pavement as flexible pavement as per City of Toronto standards.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0
Pavement design part of Geo-design, Reconstruct is part of construction
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. ix. 5. Geotechnical Engineering Design and Submission Plan
Guidelines
N/A
This is part of the TRCA Guidelines
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(v) A. Project Co shall comply with the requirements described in Section B.4.1 (b) (iv).
N/A
This is a heading please see below
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) a geo-engineering report for each Grade Separation (the “Geo-engineering Reports – Grade Separation”) demonstrating conformance with Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 1.3
S-811 (DDS/CDS)
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) A. general geotechnical engineering requirements, including:
N/A
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) A. i. permanent and temporary slopes;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) A. ii. fill types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) A. iii. compaction requirements; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) A. iv. consolidation-pre loading;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.1, 6.3.3
Consolidation will be tested as discussed in the mentioned sections. For preloading, it is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. requirements with respect to new or existing Civil Structures:
N/A
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. i. foundation types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.3, 6.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. ii. foundations piles, permanent anchors - settlements, bearing pressure and influence on other structures;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.3, 6.4, 6.10, 6.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. iii. up-lift and buoyancy design;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.9
Design to account for buoyancy is completed by structural
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. iv. frost protection;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.7

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. v. subgrade treatment - seepage blankets and u-fill, mud slabs;
N/A
We agree these will be added to geo-engineering design reports as needed to support construction.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. vi. underpinning;
N/A
The need is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. vii. protection requirements for buildings and Utilities; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) B. viii. geo-engineering design issues related to future adjacent structures;
N/A
This requirement will be addressed at a future date if more information are available
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) C. requirements with respect to pavements and Track beds, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 10.0
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) C. i. pavement types;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) C. ii. pavement design report;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.0, 10.0
Pavement design will be in separate design memos for DDS and may be included in the geotechnical design reports (CDS)
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) C. iii. subgrade drainage; and
N/A
not geo-engineering design scope, civil design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) C. iv. Track fill, backfill handling and disposal;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 8.0, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) D. requirements with respect to excavation support systems, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 6.5
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) D. i. design criteria - pressures, movement, soil parameters, types of systems for structure protection, and other similar concepts;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.2, 9.4, 9.5, 9.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) D. ii. ground water control requirements;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5.5, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) D. iv. cross-sections of critical and typical areas - all details;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) D. vii. preloading requirements;
N/A
The need is not identified in design at DDD. Can be added in future BoD if necessary.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) D. viii. base stability - soft soils or ground water uplift; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) D. ix. temporary slopes;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) E. requirements with respect to dewatering systems, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5.5, 10.0
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) E. i. water level requirements during construction defined;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5.5, 10.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) E. iv. assessment of settlement due to dewatering;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.11

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) E. v. Permits, Licences, and Approvals requirements; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 10.0, 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) E. vi. ground water treatment and disposal;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 10.0, 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. requirements with respect to geotechnical instrumentation and monitoring, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. i. Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. ii. typical installation details;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. iii. location and number of instruments;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. iv. response levels (review and alert levels); 
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. vi. response action plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. vii. schedule for instrument installation, taking baseline readings, and monitoring frequencies and durations;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. viii. measures and specific instrumentation and monitoring requirements for protecting existing adjacent structures and heritage buildings;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. ix. instrument decommissioning schedule; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific details to be included in report at CDS and coordinated with construction schedule
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) F. x. data acquisition, receiving, transmitting, collecting, and visualization system; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific details to be included in report at CDS and coordinated with construction schedule
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) G. geo-environmental requirements, including:
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0
This is a heading, please see below for requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) G. i. review existing geo-environmental information-prepare an environmental baseline and plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) G. ii. details for additional geo-environmental investigations;
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) G. iii. soil and groundwater quality;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) G. iv. identify unusual/poor soil or groundwater conditions-prepare risk assessment plan;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) G. v. soil and groundwater disposal management requirements;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) G. vi. soil stratigraphy; and
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iv) G. vii. waste management plan-soil and groundwater;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.2 (h)
 (h) Project Co shall reconstruct all parking lots as required to facilitate the Initial Works described and as recommended by a geotechnical engineer licensed in the Province of Ontario.
N/A
item should be under construction and not design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (d)
 (iv) I. Project Co shall provide a geotechnical report by a Professional Engineer licensed in the Province of Ontario documenting soil conditions and outlining settlement requirements and soil bearing capacities. Project Co shall provide foundations and slabs on grade not to exceed the estimated settlement and bearing capacity of the above report.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.3, 9.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.1 (c)
(ii) A. v. 3. a description of key drainage issues and a plan and approach as to how they are to be addressed in the design including issues regarding groundwater and fisheries, spills, flooding, sewer capacity, and other environmental impacts, if applicable;
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 10.0, 11.0
also applies to drainage team
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.5 (c)
(i) Project Co shall be responsible for excavating, demolishing, and/or removing any archaeological and heritage structures if required for new construction in conformity with the requirements of Governmental Authority and the recommendations of the “Stage 1 Archaeological Assessment of The Union Station Trainshed Enhancement Project (USEP), On-Corridor Works (OnCorr), City of Toronto, Ontario.”
N/A
Not geo-engineering scope
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.5 (c)
(ii) Project Co shall complete all archeological work in compliance with the terms of the Ontario Heritage Act and the Ministry of Tourism and Culture’s 2011 Standard and Guidelines for Consultant Archaeologists (MTC 2011); and Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations.
N/A
Not geo-engineering scope
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.5 (c)
(iii) B. submit drawings, staging plans, schedules, dust mitigation plans, and demolition methodology (the “Union Station Demolition Plan”) to Contracting Authority for review prior to the commencement of any demolition work as outlined in Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure.
N/A
Not geo-engineering scope
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.5 (d)
(i) Project Co shall submit Erosion and Sediment Control Plans in accordance with Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations and related designs to Contracting Authority for review in conformity with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 10.0, 11.0
Environmental Scope with Hydrogeology
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.6 (a)
(i) Project Co shall undertake subsurface investigations as necessary to enable the detailed design and construction of the Initial Works. Project Co shall supply results of investigations to the Contracting Authority in conformity with the requirements of Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.6 (a)
(ii) Project Co shall submit copies of any reports provided by Project Co’s geo-engineering team for design to Contracting Authority in conformity with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
N/A
Not geo-engineering scope
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.6 (a)
(iii) Project Co shall provide the locations and elevations of all boreholes, test pits, cone penetration tests, and other field testing or sounding locations to the Contracting Authority. 
N/A
Geo-investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.9 (b)
(iv) A. iv. Project Co shall design the Initial Works to account for temporary loads from construction equipment and from the stockpiling of construction material or excavated materials at the ground surface. 
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.5.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.9 (f)
(ii) A. Project Co shall submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure a Ground Instrument Monitoring Plan (GIMP) for all excavation work that may result in voids in the soil and/or the settlement of track structure, adjacent bridges, buildings, or facilities (the “Union Station Geotechnical Investigation Management Plan”).
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.12
Site specific plan to be included in report at CDS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.5 (b)
(b) Project Co shall provide the road access, storm water management and geoengineering works in compliance with this Project Agreement.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 1.3, 3
applies for geo-engineering works
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.16 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide all foundations and slopes in compliance with the Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual (CFEM) 
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 3.1
This applies for TPFs and Stations 
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.16 (b)
(b) Project Co shall carry out its own investigations to satisfy itself of the site conditions. 
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 9.1, 9.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.16 (c)
(c) Project Co shall prepare and provide a complete set of reports for geotechnical design of foundations in accordance with Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 1.3, 9.3, 9.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.16 (d)
(d) Project Co shall conduct all field and laboratory testing in accordance with the MTO Laboratory Testing Manual and ASTM standards.
N/A
Geo-Investigations scope 
Has been identified as a derogation
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.16 (e)
(e) Project Co shall provide all field test and laboratory report to the Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure.
N/A
Geo-Investigations scope not geo-engineering design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.16 (g)
(g) Project Co shall carry out all the Initial Works in compliance with the requirements of the Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations, Governmental Authority and OPS.
Basis of Design Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001, Section 11.0

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.6.2 (e)
(i) The existing bridges may contain lead paint and other toxic materials, such as cadmium, chromium, arsenic, asbestos, or any other designated substance as defined by O.Reg. 490/09 Designated Substances (as amended) and mould within the Lands. Project Co shall be responsible for confirming the presence of designated substance, and removing and disposing of the affected coating system or material within the work area using appropriate containment, worker protection and pollution control as per Applicable Law.
N/A
Not Geo-design scope, part of Environmental Team scope



Regional Geology



The Quaternary soil deposits are believed to have been deposited over the course of at least two glaciation stages and one interglacial (i.e., warmer) stage. The oldest soil deposits identified in the region are the Illinoian tills which, where present, immediately overlie bedrock. These tills are overlain by interglacial period lacustrine sands, silts, and clays that are, in turn, overlain by the most recent glacial deposits. The majority of the surficial deposits in the greater Toronto area are believed to have been deposited during the Wisconsin glacial period. This period saw several glacier advances and retreats. During the glacial advances, till deposits were set down and during retreats, glaciofluvial and glaciolacustrine deposits formed in meltwater streams and lakes (Baker et.al, 1998). Numerous small pockets of lake or pond deposits are to be found scattered throughout the till plain in depressions at the till surface. These deposits tend to be concentrated along the edges of the major stream valleys.
The significant deposits encountered in the surrounding the greater Toronto area include the fine-grained soils of the Newmarket Till, Halton Till, Sunnybrook Till, Wildfield Till and sandy/granular soils from the Thorncliffe, Scarborough, Pottery Road and Don Formations (Baker, et.al, 1998). The formations were formed during the glacial retreat while the Sunnybrook Till and the younger Leaside and Wildfield Tills were formed during ice advances (Baker et.al, 1998 and Sharpe, 1980).
The Halton Till is generally considered a fine-grained diamicton with minor fine-grained lacustrine sediments incorporated within the body of the unit, likely from glacial reworking of underlying lacustrine sediments (Sharpe, 1980). The Halton Till is typically stiff to hard in consistency, though near the ground surface, weathering can result in it being degraded to consistencies ranging from soft to firm. The Halton Till also contains cobbles and boulders. In some areas, “boulder pavements” (Watt, 1955) can be encountered where boulders are nested or concentrated in a layer within the till unit.
Table C summarizes the mapped surficial and bedrock geology along the GO Corridors. Geological descriptions are consistent with the Ontario Geologic Survey (OGS) Surficial Geology of Southern Ontario (2010) descriptions.
Table C : Surficial Geology Along Go Corridors
GO Corridor
Mapped surficial geology
Bedrock geology
USRC
Older tills (stratified deposits with sands and silts); Glaciolacustrine deposits – coarse textured consisting of sands and gravels (littoral deposits)
Georgian Bay Formation, Blue Mountain Formation, Billings Formation, Collingwood Member, Eastview Member
Lakeshore East
Modern alluvial deposits (clays, silts, sands, gravels and organic remains); Sandy silt to silty sand till (Newmarket Till); Glaciolacustrine deposits (fine and coarse textured); Pockets of organic deposits (peat, muck)

Stouffville
Sandy silt to silty sand till (Newmarket Till); Glaciolacustrine deposits (fine and coarse textured)

Richmond Hill
Modern alluvial deposits (clays, silts, sands, gravels and organic remains); Glaciolacustrine deposits (fine and coarse textured); Ice-contact deposits of sands and gravels, originated in moraines and eskers; Clayey silt to silty clay tills (Halton Till)

Barrie
Glaciolacustrine deposits – coarse textured consisting of sands and gravels (foreshore and basin deposits), and fine textured consisting of interbedded silts and clays; Pockets of organic deposits (peat, muck)
Ottawa Group; Simcoe Group; Shadow Lake Formation
Georgian Bay Formation, Blue Mountain Formation, Billings Formation, Collingwood Member, Eastview Member
Kitchener
Glaciofluvial deposits – gravelly river deposits; Ice-contact deposits of sands and gravels, originated in moraines and eskers; Clayey silt to silty clay tills (Halton Till)
Georgian Bay Formation, Blue Mountain Formation, Billings Formation, Collingwood Member, Eastview Member
Guelph Formation, Amabel Formation
Milton
Bedrock; Glaciolacustrine deposits – coarse textured consisting of sands and gravels (foreshore and basin deposits),
Queenston Formation
Lakeshore West
Bedrock; Glaciolacustrine deposits – coarse textured consisting of sands and gravels (foreshore and basin deposits), and fine textured consisting of interbedded silts and clays; Clayey silt to silty clay tills (Halton Till)
Queenston Formation
Georgian Bay Formation, Blue Mountain Formation, Billings Formation, Collingwood Member, Eastview Member
The project area is underlain by shale, limestone, dolostone, sandstone and siltstone of Ordovician age across the majority of the project area and by Middle and Lower Silurian-age sandstone, shale, dolostone and siltstone westward between Georgetown and Kitchener pertaining to several formations.
The Amabel and Guelph Formations correspond to the Middle and Lower Silurian age rocks. The Amabel Formation is characterized by white to blue-grey, thick to massive-bedded, dolostones formed through dolomitization of limestone once present in the Michigan Basin where the rock was formed. The Amabel Formation forms a caprock at the Niagara Escarpment. The Guelph Formation overlies the Amabel Formation and consists of yellow-white crystalline dolomite. The fractured nature of the limestone and dolostone permit the flow of groundwater, categorizing it as a bedrock aquifer in north Burlington.
Ottawa and Simcoe Groups consist of Middle Ordovician age rocks; both groups are equivalent and vary in name by geographical location (termed as Ottawa Group in Eastern Ontario). Within the Simcoe Group are the following formations (in ascending order): Gull River, Bobcaygeon, Verulam, and Lindsay Formations (Hewitt, 1972). The Group is composed of fine-grained limestone (Collingwood Member), containing interbeds of shale in the Verulam and Lindsay Formations. The thickness of the group is approximately 150 m to 180 m.
The Shadow Lake Formation is the lowest of the Simcoe Group and consists of arkose and red and green shale overlying Precambrian basement rock, ranging in thickness from approximately 0 m to 10 m.
The Georgian Bay, Blue Mountain and Billings Formations are grey to black shales of the Upper Ordovician, varying only by name due to geographical location (Blue Mountain and Billings are found to be equivalent to Georgian Bay in Eastern Ontario). Shales of this Formation are grey to black, containing interbeds of calcareous siltstone to limestone with few fossils. The Georgian Bay Formation ranges in thickness from approximately 130 m on Nottawasaga Bay to 180 m in the Toronto area.
The Blue Mountain Formation (colloquially known as the Whitby Formation) is found in Durham Region and York and Simcoe Counties. The Blue Mountain Formation consists of three members: a lower black shale, middle brown shale, and upper grey and blue shale member (Hewitt, 1972). The Whitby Formation ranges in thickness from approximately 50 m along the Nottawasaga Bay to 90 m near Lake Ontario.
In the Toronto and Whitby areas, shales of the Blue Mountain and Georgian Bay Formations are known to contain pockets of methane. Based on existing information, gases encountered in bedrock may lead to borehole blowout in extreme cases where appropriate care and monitoring are not adopted.
The Queenston Formation consists of red and grey shale of the Upper Ordovician age, interbedded with thin layers of siltstone, limestone, and calcareous sandstone. Post-depositional oxidation and reduction processes contribute to the colouration of oxidation of hematite minerals and localized green banding found in the Formation.
Appendix C
Properties for Geo-Engineering Design
Table D: Properties for Geo-Engineering Design
