 Design Criteria for Structures
ut






MM/DD/YYYY
P01.01
Internal Review
Name
Name
Name
Name
Date
MM/DD/YYYY
Rev.
Status
Prepared By
Checked By
Approved By
Approved By

Eng. Disc. Lead
Eng. Manager
Client










































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































List of Table
Table 3-1: List of Abbreviations	60
Table 4-1: Standards, Codes and Regulations	61
Table 4-2: Stakeholders Standards and Guidelines	62
Table 5-1: Dead loads	63
Table 5-2: Load Combination Legend per CHBDC	68
Table 5-3: Maximum and Minimum Load Factors per CHBDC	68
Table 5-4: Load Combinations per CHBDC	69
Table 5-5: Load Combination Legend per AREMA	70
Table 5-6: Service Load Design per AREMA	71
Table 5-7: Load Factor Design per AREMA	71
Table 5-8: Specified Material Properties for Preferred Ballast Mat System	72
Table 5-9: Specified Concrete Strength by Element	72
Table 5-10: Required Concrete Cover to Reinforcing	73
Table 5-11: Required Reinforcing Yield Strengths	73
Table 5-12: Required Structural Steel Grade by Element	73
Table 5-13: Required Structural Steel Grade by Member Type	74
Table 5-14: Design Components and Minimum Design Life	76
Table 6-1: Proposed Types of Retaining Walls	81
Table 10-1: Asset Design Life	96
Table 10-2: Civil Earthworks	97
Table 13-1: Roads, and Walkways	105
Table 13-2: Add Table Caption	114
Table 13-3: Add Table Caption	117
Table 13-4: Add Table Caption	118
Table 13-5: Add Table Caption	118
Table 13-6: Add Table Caption	119
Table 13-7: Add Table Caption	119
Table 13-8: Add Table Caption	120
Table 13-9: Add Table Caption	121
Table 13-10: Add Table Caption	122
Table 13-11: Add Table Caption	123
Table 13-12: Add Table Caption	123
Table 13-13: Add Table Caption	125
Table 22-1: Results of Previous Cultural Heritage Reporting and Heritage Design Criteria	1
Table 26-1: List of Deviations from PA	4
Table 26-2: Reference Program Documents	6



List of Figures
Figure 1-1: ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Works Development Context Plan	2
Figure 2-1: Existing Plan View of Birchmount Road Over-Bridge (North is up)	3
Figure 2-2: Existing Street View of Birchmount Road Over-Bridge (Looking North)	4
Figure 2-3: ADD TITLE	5
Figure 2-4: ADD TITLE	5
Figure 2-5: Existing Plan View of Scarborough Golf Club Road Crossing (North is up)	6
Figure 2-6: Existing Street View of Scarborough Golf Club Road Crossing (Looking South)	7
Figure 2-7: ADD TITLE	8
Figure 2-8: Existing Plan View of Galloway Rd Crossing (North is up)	9
Figure 2-9: Existing Street View of Galloway Rd Crossing (Looking South)	10
Figure 2-10: Proposed Galloway Rd Profile	11
Figure 2-11: Proposed Galloway Rd Track Profile	11
Figure 2-12: ADD TITLE	12
Figure 2-13: ADD TITLE	12
Figure 2-14: Existing Plan View of Poplar Rd Crossing (North is up)	14
Figure 2-15: Existing Street View of Poplar Rd Crossing (Looking South)	14
Figure 2-16: Proposed Poplar Rd Profile	15
Figure 2-17: Proposed Poplar Rd Track Profile	16
Figure 2-18: ADD TITLE	17
Figure 2-19: Existing Plan View of Morningside Avenue Crossing (North is up)	18
Figure 2-20: Existing Street View of Morningside Avenue Crossing (Looking South)	19
Figure 2-21: ADD TITLE	19
Figure 2-22: Existing Plan View of Highland Creek Rail Bridge (North is up)	21
Figure 2-23: Existing Street View of Highland Creek Rail Bridge (Looking East)	21
Figure 2-24: Existing Plan View of Thickson Road Bridge (North is up)	23
Figure 2-25: Existing Street View of Thickson Rd Bridge (Looking South)	23
Figure 2-26: Existing Plan View of McNaughton Rd Crossing (North is up)	26
Figure 2-27: Existing Street View of McNaughton Rd Crossing (Looking East)	26
Figure 2-28: Proposed McNaughton Rd Profile	27
Figure 2-29: Add caption	28
Figure 2-30: Existing Plan View of Tannery Creek Crossing (North is up)	29
Figure 2-31: Existing Elevation of Tannery Creek Culvert (Looking West)	29
Figure 2-32: Existing Plan View of Danforth Road Crossing (North is up)	31
Figure 2-33: Existing Street View of Danforth Road Crossing (Looking East)	31
Figure 2-34: Proposed Roadway Plan at Danforth Road Grade Separation	34
Figure 2-35: Existing Plan View of Corvette Avenue Crossing (North is up)	35
Figure 2-36: Existing Street View of Corvette Avenue Crossing (Looking East)	35
Figure 2-37: Existing Plan View of Progress Avenue Crossing (North is up)	37
Figure 2-38: Existing Street View of Progress Avenue Crossing (Looking East)	38
The proposed road profile for the Progress Avenue over rail corridor structure and the Progress Avenue over West Highland Creek structure is shown in Figure 2-39. The proposed road profile for the Access Road #3 over West Highland Creek structure is shown in Error! Reference source not found..	38
Figure 2-40: Proposed Progress Avenue Road Profile	38
Figure 2-41: Proposed Profile for Access Road #3	39
Figure 242: Proposed Progress Avenue Grade Separation Road Layout	42
Figure 2-43: Existing Plan View of Havendale Road Crossing (North is up)	43
Figure 2-44: Existing Street View of Havendale Road Crossing (Looking East)	43
Figure 2-45: Existing Plan View of Huntingwood Drive Crossing (North is up)	45
Figure 2-46: Existing Street View of Huntingwood Drive Crossing (Looking East)	46
Figure 2-47: Proposed Huntingwood Drive Road Profile	47
Figure 248: Proposed Huntingwood Drive Typical Cross Section	48
Figure 249: Proposed Huntingwood Drive Road Plan	48
Figure 2-50: Existing Plan View of McNicoll Avenue Crossing (North is up)	49
Figure 2-51: Existing Street View of McNicoll Avenue Crossing (Looking East)	50
Figure 2-52: Proposed McNicoll Avenue Road Profile	51
Figure 253: Proposed McNicoll Avenue Road Plan	52
Figure 2-54: Existing Plan View of Denison Street Crossing (North is up)	53
Figure 2-55: Existing Street View of Denison Street Crossing (Looking East)	53
Figure 2-56: Proposed Denison Street Road Profile	54
Figure 2573: Proposed Denison Street Road Plan	55
Figure 2-58: Existing Plan View of Islington Avenue Bridge (North is up)	56
Figure 2-59: Existing Track View of Islington Avenue Crossing (Looking West)	56
Figure 2-60: East Elevation view of Existing Islington Avenue Bridge	57
Figure 2-61: Existing Plan View from EP19 to Platform (North is Up)	58
Figure 2-62: Existing Elevation View from EP19 to Platform (Looking West)	58
Figure 5-1: Cooper E 80 Load (AREMA Figure 15-1-2)	64
Figure 5-2: Alternative Live Load on Four Axles (AREMA Figure 15-1-3)	64
Figure 5-3: CL-625-ONT Truck (CHBDC Figure 3.2)	65
Figure 5-4: CL-625-ONT Truck Loading (CHBDC Figure A3.4.1)	65
Figure 5-5: CL-625-ONT Lane Loading (CHBDC Figure A3.4.2)	66
Figure 5-6: Lateral Loading Diagram (Metrolinx Drawing F4i)	68
Figure 5-7: Deflection Limits for Road Structures	76
Figure 5-8: Rail Vehicle Clearance Diagram	77
Figure 5-9: Typical cross section for horizontal clearance requirements	78
Figure 5-10: Typical section for horizontal clearance requirement for abutments on piles	79


List of Appendices
Appendix A	 Pursuit Phase Preliminary Drawings


1.Introduction
Metrolinx (Sponsor) has retained ONxpress (consisting of ONxpress CJV Engineering and ONxpress CJV) to complete the GO Rail Expansion On Corridor Works (RER3) project in order to improve the transit system for the Greater Toronto Area (GTA). 
1.1Purpose
The purpose of this report is to describe the basis of design for structures (bridge modifications/expansions, culverts, tunnels, grade separations, retaining walls, and OCS poles) associated with the RER3 program and establish:
Minimum standards;
Safety of personnel and equipment;
Legal regulatory and statutory requirements;
Environmental and sustainable development objectives; and, 
Minimum life-cycle costs.
The report summarizes the scope of work applicable to the RER3 project’s structures and the design criteria that will be considered as part of the ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Civil Works.   
1.2GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor
GO Transit is a regional transit system serving the Golden Horseshoe region of Ontario with its hub at Union Station in Toronto. It operates on infrastructure that is either owned by Metrolinx (MX territory), or by third parties such as Canadian National Railway (CN) or Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) (non-MX territory).
GO Rail Expansion is a program which will provide more travel options for residents and commuters. Upon delivery, the GO Rail Expansion program will provide faster, more frequent, two-way, all-day service on core segments of the GO rail network.
The On-Corridor Works project is a part of the Province's GO Rail Expansion. Under the GO Expansion, the fleet is expected to switch to electric locomotives. There are no further indications of specific vehicle requirements.
1.3ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Civil Works
Figure 1-1 below shows the locations of the required grade separations. In addition to these grade separation structures, there are existing structures that will need to be modified to support the required RER3 program works. 


Figure 1-1: ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Works Development Context Plan
2.Construction Work Packages Scope Description
The civil infrastructure design scope encompasses the Construction Work Packages described in the following sections.
2.1Lakeshore East – Kingston 
Civil infrastructure design in this rail corridor covers the Metrolinx-owned, GO Transit Lakeshore East rail sub-division, operating between Union Station and Oshawa, and services between Danforth Street and Kennedy Road, Scarborough Junction, Durham Junction, and between West Whitby.
2.1.1Birchmount Road Bridge Project (LSE 11+800)
The PA Part C, Schedule C-5 - Enabling Works Technical Specifications and Metrolinx Briefing Note 2022-004 provided by Metrolinx outlines Kingston (Lakeshore East) requirements for the Birchmount Road Bridge Project.
Scope will include improvements for the vertical clearance above the rail corridor and construction of sufficient space for a future fourth track which is not part of this project;
Phased demolition of the existing bridge superstructure and substructure;
Construction of the new bridge structure and associated rail corridor infrastructure and/or road works;
Construction of Retaining Walls along North side;
Grading for 4th track underneath bridge;
The existing Birchmount Road Over-Bridge is a three-span (13.5 m – 23.6 m – 13.5 m) reinforced concrete structure constructed in 1960 and last rehabilitated in 1996. It carries four vehicle traffic lanes and two sidewalks over three tracks. The existing substructure is conventional concrete abutments and piers on shallow foundations. The existing structure has a skew of 47°45’, a total width of 18.2 m, and an existing vertical clearance to the structure’s soffit of 6.85 m. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Figure 2-1 and Figure 2-2, respectively.

Figure 2-1: Existing Plan View of Birchmount Road Over-Bridge (North is up)

Figure 2-2: Existing Street View of Birchmount Road Over-Bridge (Looking North)
2.1.1.1Design of Structure
TBD
2.1.1.2Geotechnical Design
The ONxpress geotechnical team has existing geotechnical reports are not 
2.1.1.3Design of Roadway
The Birchmount Road Grade Separation will be a road bridge structure over 4 tracks (3 existing, 1 proposed) from Highview Avenue at the south limits of the project area to Raleigh Avenue at the north limit of the project area. A new NB to WB left turn bay will be introduced at Mack Avenue which will extend southward onto the road bridge structure.

Figure 2-3: ADD TITLE
The overall Birchmount Road cross will include 4 through lanes (two NB and two SB) with a variable width left turn and median in the center of the structure. The cross section includes a sidewalk on both the east and west side of the 

Figure 2-4: ADD TITLE
The design reference documents, design approach and  design criteria are detailed in Section 12 of this document.
2.1.2Scarborough Golf Club Road Grade Separation (LSE 19+100)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-5 - Enabling Works Technical Specifications provided by Metrolinx outlines Kingston (Lakeshore East) requirements for the Grade Separation of Scarborough Golf Club Road (Project #41, Lakeshore East – Central Corridor Expansion Project). 
The Enabling Works Technical Specifications indicate that the structure shall be a new road-under-rail grade separation between the Scarborough Golf Club Road and the Kingston Subdivision at MP321.97.
The Grade Separation shall  four rail bridge a two-lane road including bike lanes and elevated pedestrian walkways under the new rail bridge; and temporary and permanent relocation of existing municipal and  utility infrastructure including storm water, sanitary sewer, water main, hydro, Enbridge, Bell Canada and Rogers.
Temporary diversions of the existing three tracks to the south and re-instatement of the three tracks onto the new rail bridge
The existing Scarborough Golf Club Road and Kingston rail corridor intersection is an at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Figure 2-5 and Figure 2-6, respectively.

Figure 2-5: Existing Plan View of Scarborough Golf Club Road Crossing (North is up)


Figure 2-6: Existing Street View of Scarborough Golf Club Road Crossing (Looking South)
2.1.2.1Design of Structure
TBD
The PA indicates that a temporary diversion shall be provided for the three existing tracks during construction. ONxpress is currently evaluating the use of diversion tracks along this length of rail corridor. It is expected that the decision regarding whether diversion tracks are used or not will affect the construction methods/staging at the Galloway Road Grade Separation, Poplar Road Grade Separation, and the Morningside Avenue Road Grade Separation. 
2.1.2.2Geotechnical Design

 
2.1.2.3Design of Roadway
No GDC in Appendix F of Schedule C-6.
The Scarborough Golf Club Road Grade Separation will be a structure carrying four tracks (three existing, one new) over Scarborough Golf Club Road. 
Scarborough Golf Club Road cross section is proposed as a two-lane, two-way road with a bike path at the road grade elevation on each side and an elevated sidewalk on each side. The grade separation profile is currently designed at 8% which is under review. 

Figure 2-7: ADD TITLE
The figure above is a note from the Reference Concept Design.
2.1.2.4



2.1.3Galloway Rd Grade Separation (LSE 20+750)
The PA Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.3 provided by Metrolinx outlines Kingston (Lakeshore East) requirements for the Grade Separation of Galloway Road (subsection (ii) Grade Separations Clause A. Galloway Road) and Appendix F.
The PA indicates that the structure shall be a new Grade Separation between Galloway Road and the Kingston Subdivision at MP 320.95 in the Town of Scarborough.
The Grade Separation shall be a new Undergrade Bridge Structure supporting the ONxpress Infrastructure (Galloway Road under the Network). The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments of the Network shall be maintained.
Further to Clause (a) Fixed Infrastructure Works Requirements, additional requirements given by Clauses (b) Roadway and (c) Structural Design Criteria and Requirements include the following:
ONxpress shall provide a pumping station for Galloway Road Grade separation in compliance with the Ontario Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Design Guidelines for Sewage Works for the Pumping Station. ONxpress shall size pumps and pumping stations to accommodate the volume of stormwater determined by design of stormwater management system, shall comply with City of Toronto requirements.
ONxpress shall provide all new Civil Structures including the Galloway Road “Rail over Road” Grade Separation structures, in the Town of Scarborough, including all retaining and supporting structures.
ONxpress shall design and construct the grade separation structures at Galloway Road to resist the vehicle collision loads specific by the CHBDC.
Poplar Road and Morningside Avenue shall not have simultaneous lane closures or restrictions for the Initial Works related to the Galloway Road grade separations.
The existing Galloway Road and Kingston rail corridor intersection is an at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Figure 2-8 and Figure 2-9, respectively.

Figure 2-8: Existing Plan View of Galloway Rd Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-9: Existing Street View of Galloway Rd Crossing (Looking South)
2.1.3.1Design of Structure
The structure design for the Galloway Road Grade Separation will be a precast concrete box structure carrying four tracks (three existing, one new) over Galloway Road (two vehicle traffic lanes, an elevated sidewalk, and an MUP). The preferred staging option has been identified as construction without diversion tracks using the jack-and-slide construction method. Although the PA does not require diversion tracks at this location, ONxpress is currently evaluating the use of diversion tracks along this length of rail corridor. It is expected that the decision regarding whether diversion tracks are used or not will affect the construction methods/staging at the Scarborough Road Grade Separation, Poplar Road Grade Separation, and the Morningside Avenue Road Grade Separation. 
The concrete box will have a 20.8 m span and a total width of 17.8 m. 4 m long precast approach slabs will be provided for the rail corridor at both east and west approaches to the structure. The concrete box will have 1.4 m thick walls and a minimum of 1.4 m thick top and bottom slabs. An 18 m wide by 5.3 m tall clearance will be provided inside the box. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure running parallel to the roadway. The retaining wall at the south-west quadrant will extend and tie-in to the Westlake Road intersection, measuring approximately 87 m in length. The south-west retaining wall will be a secant pile wall at deeper sections and a soldier pile and lagging wall at shallower sections. The retaining wall at the south-east quadrant will be approximately 42 m in length and will be an RSS wall. The retaining walls on the north side of the structure will be approximately 10 m in length each and will be RSS walls.
Refer to Galloway Road Grade Separation Options Evaluation RER3-WSH-STR-MEM-KN-00014 and Galloway Rd Grade Separation General Arrangement RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00002. The proposed road and track profiles are shown in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-10: Proposed Galloway Rd Profile

Figure 2-11: Proposed Galloway Rd Track Profile
2.1.3.2Geotechnical Design
 …..   
2.1.3.3Roadway Design
The Galloway Road Grade Separation will be a structure carrying four tracks (three existing, one new) over Galloway Road. This will include regrading and re-surfacing of adjacent accesses within the influence area of the grade separation (Chantrey Court and Westlake Road). 

Figure 2-12: ADD TITLE
The Galloway Road cross section will include two vehicle traffic lanes (one NB and one SB), with an adjacent bike lane at road elevation and an elevated sidewalk on the west side of Galloway Road, as well as a Multiuse Pathway on the east side of Galloway Road.

Figure 2-13: ADD TITLE
The design reference documents, design approach and site-specific design criteria are detailed in Section 12 of this document.
2.1.3.4


2.1.4Poplar Rd Grade Separation (LSE 21+161)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.3 provided by Metrolinx outlines Kingston (Lakeshore East) requirements for the Grade Separation of Poplar Road (subsection (ii) Grade Separations Clause B. Poplar Road) and Appendix F. 
The PA indicates that the structure shall be a new pedestrian underpass tunnel for a multi-use pathway (MUP) as well as two (2) new cul-de-sacs to supplement the Poplar Road closure on the Kingston Subdivision at MP 320.65 in the Town of Scarborough.
The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments of the Network shall be  and the new pedestrian underpass tunnel shall accommodate all existing tracks and one new additional track south of the existing.
Further to Clause (a) Fixed Infrastructure Works Requirements, additional requirements given by Clauses (b) Roadway and (c) Structural Design Criteria and Requirements include the following:
ONxpress shall provide a vehicular turning circle configurations for the Poplar Road Underpass as set out in Appendix F of this Schedule C-6 Section B and as required by the Municipalities. 
ONxpress shall provide all new Civil Structures including the Poplar Road Underpass structures, in the Town of Scarborough, including all retaining and supporting structures.

The existing Poplar Road and Kingston rail corridor intersection is an at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Figure 2-14 and Figure 2-15, respectively.

Figure 2-14: Existing Plan View of Poplar Rd Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-15: Existing Street View of Poplar Rd Crossing (Looking South)
2.1.4.1Design of Structure
The structure design for the Poplar Road Grade Separation will be a precast concrete box tunnel carrying three tracks (two existing, one new) over a new MUP. The preferred staging option has been identified as construction without a diversion track. Although the PA does not require diversion tracks at this location, ONxpress is currently evaluating the use of diversion tracks along this length of rail corridor. It is expected that the decision regarding whether diversion tracks are used or not will affect the construction methods/staging at the Scarborough Road Grade Separation, Galloway Road Grade Separation, and the Morningside Avenue Road Grade Separation.
The precast concrete box will have a 5.8 m span and a total width of 18 m. 4 m long precast approach slabs will be provided for the MUP at both north and south approaches to the structure. The concrete box will have 400 mm thick walls and 500 mm thick top and bottom slabs. 100 mm of asphalt will be provided at the  of the structure on the bottom slab, sloping down at 2% towards the walls. A 5 m wide by 3 m tall clearance will be provided inside the box. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure. The retaining walls on the north end of the structure will extend and tie-in to the Gardentree Street intersection, measuring approximately 73 m in length each. The retaining walls on the south side of the structure will be approximately 7 m in length each. All required retaining walls will be RSS walls. 
Refer to Poplar Road Grade Separation Options Evaluation RER3-WSH-STR-MEM-KN-00013 and Poplar Rd Grade Separation General Arrangement RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00001 for further details. The proposed road and track profiles are shown in Figure 2-16 and Figure 2-17, respectively.

Figure 2-16: Proposed Poplar Rd Profile

Figure 2-17: Proposed Poplar Rd Track Profile
2.1.4.2Geotechnical Design

 
2.1.4.3Design of Roadways
The Poplar Road crossing (including sidewalk) will be converted to a grade separated multi-use pathway under the rail line which will remain on existing grade. The pathway will be 3m wide with 1m of clearance on either side for a total clear width of 5m.
The existing sidewalk on the west side of Poplar Road will be removed and the proposed multi-use pathway will be tied into the existing sidewalk system on the north and south side of the tracks.
A retaining wall will be designed to extend from the box culvert to a location where the grade surrounding the multi-use path can be reasonably sloped.
Poplar Road south of the rail line will be terminated south of the track at a cul-de-sac on the west side of the existing Poplar Road alignment. Poplar Road north of the rail line will be terminated north of the track at a cul-de-sac on the east side of the existing Poplar Road alignment. Poplar Road will remain a two-lane road surface with 4m lanes terminating at the cul-de-sac that is 25m in diameter.

Figure 2-18: ADD TITLE
The roads and paths are to be hard surfaced with asphalt and adjacent concrete curbing will be designed along the shoulder/edge of Poplar Road.
The roadways at the Poplar Road grade separation will be constructed during full closure of Poplar Road where traffic crossing the rail line will be detoured to the adjacent roads at Galloway Road and Morningside Avenue. 
It is expected that the Poplar Road crossing works will occur after the grade separation work at Galloway Road and Morningside Avenue to allow Poplar Road to remain in place for the associated detouring traffic during construction at the adjacent grade separations.
2.1.4.4


2.1.5Morningside Avenue Grade Separation (LSE 21+600)
The PA Part C, Schedule C-5 - Enabling Works Technical Specifications provided by Metrolinx outlines Kingston (Lakeshore East) requirements for the Grade Separation of Morningside Avenue (Project #41, Lakeshore East – Central Corridor Expansion Project). 
The Enabling Works Technical Specifications indicates that the structure shall be a new road-under-rail grade separation between the Morningside Avenue and the Kingston Subdivision at MP 320.40.
The Grade Separation shall a two-lane road including bike lanes and elevated pedestrian walkways under the new rail bridge; and temporary and permanent relocation of existing municipal and third party utility infrastructure including storm water, sanitary sewer, water main, hydro, Enbridge, Bell Canada and Rogers.
ONxpress shall provide temporary diversions of the existing two tracks to the south and re-instatement of the two tracks onto the new rail bridge.
The existing Morningside Avenue and Kingston rail corridor intersection is an at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Figure 2-19 and Figure 2-20, respectively.

Figure 2-19: Existing Plan View of Morningside Avenue Crossing (North is up)


Figure 2-20: Existing Street View of Morningside Avenue Crossing (Looking South)
2.1.5.1Design of Structure
TBD
The PA indicates that a temporary diversion shall be provided for the two existing tracks during construction. ONxpress is currently evaluating the use of diversion tracks along this length of rail corridor. It is expected that the decision regarding whether diversion tracks are used or not will affect the construction methods/staging at the Galloway Road Grade Separation, Poplar Road Grade Separation, and the Scarborough Golf Club Road Grade Separation. 
2.1.5.2Geotechnical Design

2.1.5.3Design of Roadway
The Morningside Avenue Grade Separation will be a rail structure carrying four tracks (three existing, one new) over Morningside Avenue. 
The overall cross section of Morningside Avenue includes four lanes of traffic (two NB lanes and two SB lanes) and an elevated MUP on each side of the roadway which is composed of a bike path immediately adjacent to the road and a sidewalk. A median bridge pier is proposed to be located in the median of the roadway. The cross section below is based on the Reference Concept Design and needs to be confirmed with the traffic authority.

Figure 2-21: ADD TITLE
2.1.5.4


2.1.6Highland Creek Rail Bridge Expansion (LSE 24+760)
The PA Part C, Schedule C-5 - Enabling Works Technical Specifications provided by Metrolinx outlines Kingston (Lakeshore East) requirements for the Highland Creek Rail Bridge Expansion (Project #41, Lakeshore East – Central Corridor Expansion Project). 
The Enabling Works Technical Specifications indicates that the work scope shall be the expansion of the existing two track capacity bridge to three tracks carrying capacity bridge (MP318.5). 
The bridge expansion is proposed at the north side of the current bridge and ONxpress shall provide the widening of the center pier to support the proposed bridge expansion including the construction of the catenary bases to support future electrification of the rail corridor;
Diversion of the mainline tracks onto the newly built bridge spans to support the replacement of the existing open deck bridge spans with a new superstructure and concrete ballasted deck;
Handling and relocation of signal and cable and  utility infrastructure in accordance with the construction staging of Highland Creek and Reinstatement of the diverted mainline tracks into their original alignments.
The existing Highland Creek Rail Bridge is a two-span (26.6 m – 26.6 m) steel deck plate girder structure with timber ties constructed in 1903 and last rehabilitated in 2013. It carries two tracks over Highland Creek and a pedestrian structure. The existing substructure is masonry stone block abutments and pier, with the pier supported on micropiles. Plan and Street View of the existing structure can be seen in Figure 2-22 and Figure 2-23, respectively.

Figure 2-22: Existing Plan View of Highland Creek Rail Bridge (North is up)

Figure 2-23: Existing Street View of Highland Creek Rail Bridge (Looking East) 
2.1.6.1Design of Structure
TBD
2.1.6.2Geotechnical Design
2.1.6.3

2.1.6.4Road Design
There is no road scope proposed for the Highland Creek Rail Bridge grade separation. The existing MUP under the existing bridge structure will remain in place during construction of the rail bridge so there will need to be some consideration for closure or protection of the pathway users during bridge construction activities.
2.1.7Thickson Road Bridge Expansion (LSE 48+310)
The PA Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.3 provided by Metrolinx outlines Kingston (Lakeshore East) requirements for the expansion of the existing Thickson Road structure.
ONxpress shall provide a new overhead structure supporting one additional new Mainline Track (Network over Thickson Road) on the GO Subdivision at MP 10.67 in the Town of Whitby.
The existing horizontal and vertical alignments of Thickson Road shall be maintained in the final configuration.
ONxpress shall maintain a minimum of one (1) traffic lane in each direction on Thickson Road during construction to accommodate vehicle and cyclist traffic.
Further to Clause (a) Fixed Infrastructure Works Requirements, additional requirements given by Clauses (b) Roadway and (c) Structural Design Criteria and Requirements include the following:
As per PA, schedule C-6, B.4.3 (c)(iii) B., the following Civil Structures exist along the Kingston Subdivision and GO Subdivision, which the Initial Works may require to be used, removed, replaced, modified or rehabilitated: 
Thickson Road rail bridge structures;
Any other existing Civil Structures, as required by the Initial Works.
ONxpress shall provide a three (3) span simply supported rail bridge over Thickson Road to accommodate additional track infrastructure. The new overhead structure shall be concrete structure similar to the existing structure.
The geometry for Thickson road overhead structure shall provide provision for a multi-use path on east side of the road at same elevation of existing sidewalk. The multi-use path will be constructed by others.
ONxpress shall ensure that rail service is maintained through construction. ONxpress shall design and construct the Thickson Road structure to resist vehicle collision loads specified by the CHBDC.
Consumers Drive and Hopkins Street shall not have simultaneous lane closures or restrictions for the Initial Works related to the Thickson Road rail bridge structure.
The existing Thickson Road under-bridge was constructed in 1966 and had an expansion structure constructed in 1992. Both the original and expansion structures are three-span, reinforced concrete structures. The original structure carries three tracks, while the expansion structure carries two tracks. Plan and Street View of the existing structure can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.  

Figure 2-24: Existing Plan View of Thickson Road Bridge (North is up)

Figure 2-25: Existing Street View of Thickson Rd Bridge (Looking South)
2.1.7.1Design of Structure
The structure design for the Thickson Road Under-Bridge Expansion will be three-span steel through-plate-girders carrying one track (one new) over the existing Thickson Road (four vehicle traffic lanes, one new MUP). Although the PA indicates that the expansion structure shall match the existing structure, the existing 4.85 m minimum vertical clearance from top of road to soffit must be maintained. Considering the existing road profile, the location of the expansion structure will have the governing minimum vertical clearance. To achieve this minimum vertical clearance, a through-plate-girder structure was selected during the pursuit phase. The estimated depth of the superstructure measured from bottom of rail to bottom of girder flange was determined to be approximately 1.11 m during the pursuit phase. The structure will have a span arrangement of 11.86 m – 20.5 m – 11.86 m, a total width of 6.1 m, and a skew of 8°16’. The substructure will be conventional concrete abutments and piers supported on H-piles. The preferred staging option will include a minimum of one traffic lane operating in each direction during construction to accommodate vehicle and cyclist traffic. 4 m long approach slabs will be provided for the rail corridor at both east and west approaches to the structure. 
Refer to Thickson Road Under-Bridge Expansion Options Memorandum RER3-WSH-STR-MEM-KN-00015 and Thickson Road Under-Bridge Expansion General Arrangement RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00010 for further details. Refer to Bridge Visual Inspection Report provided by Veresk, dated 2016/12/22. It is recommended to place a TSO on the bridge to lower the train speed on both directions to 10 Miles per hours, Maximum.
2.1.7.2Geotechnical Design

  
2.1.7.3Road Design
The Thickson Road Grade Separation will be a new rail structure carrying one new track adjacent to the existing rail bridge over Thickson Road.
The Thickson Road cross section will remain the same as the existing cross section with the addition of an elevated MUP path adjacent to the road on the opposite side of the proposed bridge pier (within the head slope area of the cross section).
2.2Barrie – Newmarket
Civil infrastructure design in this rail corridor covers the Metrolinx-owned, GO Transit Barrie rail sub-division, operating between Union Station and Innisfil, and services to Kirby, East Gwillimbury and Bradford.
2.2.1McNaughton Road Grade Separation (BAR 29+755) 
The PA Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.4 provided by Metrolinx outlines Barrie Corridor (Newmarket Subdivision) requirements for the Grade Separation of McNaughton Road in subsection (ii)(A).
The ONxpress shall provide a new Grade Separation between McNaughton Road and the Newmarket Subdivision at MP 18.49 in the City of Vaughan including all retaining and supporting structures.
The Grade Separation shall be an overhead structure supporting the New Municipal Infrastructure (McNaughton Road over the Network). The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be maintained.
The new structure shall accommodate the existing track and two future tracks west of the existing track. 
ONxpress shall maintain a detour road throughout construction with a single lane of traffic in each direction on McNaughton Road. 
The existing McNaughton Road and Newmarket rail corridor intersection is an at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Figure 2-26 and Figure 2-27, respectively.

Figure 2-26: Existing Plan View of McNaughton Rd Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-27: Existing Street View of McNaughton Rd Crossing (Looking East)
2.2.1.1Design of Structure
The superstructure design for the McNaughton Road Grade Separation will be prestressed, precast, concrete box girders with a cast-in-place concrete topping slab or NU girders with partial depth precast panels and a cast-in-place concrete deck. The superstructure will carry McNaughton Road (four vehicle traffic lanes and two MUPs) over the rail corridor’s three tracks (one existing, two new). The substructure will be semi-integral abutments supported on H-piles. The preferred staging option will have two lanes of McNaughton Road detoured along the north side of the existing intersection. Temporary shoring will be provided during construction to accommodate the detour. The structure will have a single span measuring 26.75 m, a total width of 24.2 m, askew of 5°29’17”, and 2% crossfall across the structure. 6 m long approach slabs with sleeper slabs will be provided for the roadway at both east and west approaches to the structure. A 7.6 m minimum vertical clearance will be provided to the structure’s soffit and a 7.6 m minimum horizontal clearance will be provided to the wall from  of track. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure running parallel to the roadway. The retaining walls will be RSS walls and will wrap around the structure to create false abutments. During construction, temporary shoring will be installed past the RSS walls to allow for the McNaughton Road detour. 
Refer to McNaughton Road Grade Separation Options Evaluation RER3-WSH-STR-MEM-NM-00002, McNaughton Rd Grade Separation General Arrangement Option 1 RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-NM-00002, and McNaughton Rd Grade Separation General Arrangement Option 2 RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-NM-00003. The proposed road profile is shown in Figure 2-28.

Figure 2-28: Proposed McNaughton Rd Profile
2.2.1.2Geotechnical Design

 
2.2.1.3





229
2.2.1.4


2.2.2Tannery Creek Culvert Expansion (BAR 50+800) 
The existing Tannery Creek crossing along the Newmarket rail corridor was identified by the track design team as requiring an expansion for an additional track. It is located near the Newmarket/Aurora town boundary within the St. Andrews Valley Golf Club, north-east of the intersection of St. John’s Sideroad and Yonge Street. The existing Tannery Creek Culvert is a stone masonry culvert conveying Tannery Creek underneath the Newmarket rail corridor. The year of construction and the design of the existing culvert are unknown as no as-built drawings were available to ONxpress. There is also a small, timber pedestrian bridge on the east side of the existing culvert; ownership of this pedestrian bridge is unknown. Plan and elevation of the existing culvert can be seen in below Error! Reference source not found., respectively. 

Figure 2-30: Existing Plan View of Tannery Creek Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-31: Existing Elevation of Tannery Creek Culvert (Looking West)
2.2.2.1Design of Structure
The superstructure design for the Tannery Creek Culvert Expansion will consist of hollow slab panels carrying three tracks (one existing, one existing realigned, and one new) over a Tannery Creek. The new structure will span over the existing culvert and the existing wooden pedestrian bridge will have to be relocated. The east face of the structure will require a concrete headwall to retain the soil overlaying the culvert’s superstructure. The substructure will be secant walls placed behind the existing culvert’s footings. The structure will have a 6 m span and a total width of 13.42 m. 
Refer to Tannery Creek Culvert Options Evaluation RER3-WSH-STR-MEM-NM-00001 which provides background information on the culvert’s structural, hydraulic and environmental conditions. Refer to Tannery Creek Culvert General Arrangement RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-NM-00001 for pursuit phase design.
2.2.2.2Geotechnical Design
 
2.2.2.3

2.3Stouffville – Uxbridge
Civil infrastructure design in this rail corridor covers the Metrolinx-owned, GO Transit Barrie rail sub-division, operating between Union Station and Stouffville.
2.3.1Scarborough Junction and Danforth Road Grade Separation (STO 14+657)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.2 provided by Metrolinx outlines Stouffville Corridor (Uxbridge Subdivision) requirements for the Grade Separation of Danforth Road in Section (c).
The PA indicates that there shall be a new overhead structure at Danforth Road at MP 60.18.
The Grade Separation shall be supporting the New Municipal Infrastructure (Network under Danforth Road) that complies with clearance envelope requirements outlined in Schedule C-6 Section B1 – Track.
The new structure shall accommodate the existing track and one new track.
The existing vertical and horizontal alignments of Danforth Road shall be maintained in the final configuration. 
The existing Danforth Road and Uxbridge Subdivision intersection is an existing single track at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Figure 2-32 and Figure 2-33, respectively.

Figure 2-32: Existing Plan View of Danforth Road Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-33: Existing Street View of Danforth Road Crossing (Looking East)
To accommodate the road-over-rail grade separation at the Danforth Road and rail corridor intersection, the rail corridor will have to dive down on the approaches to the intersection. A utilities chamber is also required just north of the Danforth Road Grade Separation structure. The following sections describe the approach structures for the rail corridor dive down, the Danforth Road Grade Separation structure, and the utilities chamber. 
Refer to Scarborough Junction South of Danforth Road Plan and Elevations RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00004, Scarborough Junction South of Danforth Road Sections RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00005, Scarborough Junction Danforth Road Grade Separation General Arrangement RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00006, Scarborough Junction North of Danforth Road Utilities Structure Plan and Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00007, Scarborough Junction North of Danforth Road Plan and Elevations RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00008, and Scarborough Junction North of Danforth Road Sections RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-KN-00009.
2.3.1.1Design of Approach Structures
Retaining walls with a concrete invert slab will be used for the rail dive down approaching the Danforth Road Grade Separation structure. Required retaining walls will extend approximately 440 m south and 345 m north of the Danforth Road Grade Separation structure. Retaining walls will be of varying types depending on the height of wall required. Retaining wall types will include soldier pile with lagging (with and without tiebacks), ‘L’-shaped walls, and secant walls with concrete cap beam. The deepest sections (closest to the Danforth Road Grade Separation) will use top struts to brace the secant walls. Temporary intermediate struts will be required during construction. The retaining walls will have concrete facing walls along their interior face with waterproofing installed between the retaining wall and the concrete facing wall. The concrete facing wall will interface with the concrete invert slab. The preferred staging option includes a diversion track on the west side of the rail corridor. Retaining walls on the west side of the rail corridor will be designed to support the live load surcharge induced by the diversion track. Similarly, retaining walls on the east side of the rail corridor will be designed to support live load surcharge induced by Midland Avenue vehicle traffic where applicable.
The concrete invert slab will be 600 mm thick at shallower sections and 1250 mm thick at deeper sections. The invert slab will be designed to resist water uplift pressures as preliminary hydrogeological data review indicates a high water table in the area. . PA Part C – Schedule C6 clause C.14.9(b)(v) indicates that ONxpress shall ignore any pore pressure relief obtained from seepage into structures or sub drains. As such, the groundwater elevation and subsequent pressure acting on the invert slab will be revisited during design. Drainage pipes will be placed underneath the invert slab within 300 mm of crushed stone. 
2.3.1.2Design of Danforth Road Grade Separation Structure
The superstructure design for the Danforth Road Grade Separation will be precast concrete hollow slab girders with a cast-in-place concrete topping slab. The superstructure will carry Danforth Road (four vehicle traffic lanes, one vehicle traffic turn lane, and two sidewalks) over the rail corridor’s two tracks (one existing, one new). The substructure will be and extension of the approach structures’ secant pile walls with concrete cap beam. The concrete invert slab carrying the rail corridor will be 1250 mm thick and will resist water uplift pressures. During the pursuit phase, a groundwater elevation 2 m above the invert slab was assumed. This elevation was determined considering the effects of the wick and subdrains installed along the structure. PA Part C – Schedule C6 clause C.14.9(b)(v) indicates that ONxpress shall ignore any pore pressure relief obtained from seepage into structures or sub drains. As such, the groundwater elevation and subsequent pressure acting on the invert slab will be revisited during design. Similar to the approach structures, drainage pipes will be placed underneath the invert slab within 300 mm of crushed stone. Wick drains will be provided through every filler caisson discharging between the facing wall and down to the crushed stone. The preferred staging option will have three lanes of Danforth Road detoured along either the north portion or the south portion of the existing Danforth Road, depending on the stage of construction. The structure will have a single span measuring 10.7 m, a total width of 42 m, and 2% crossfall across the structure. 6 m long approach slabs will be provided for the roadway at both east and west approaches to the structure. A 7.6 m minimum vertical clearance will be provided to the structure’s soffit. 
2.3.1.3Design of the Utilities Chamber
A utilities chamber, grit separator chamber, and manholes are required just north of the Danforth Road Grade Separation. The utilities chamber will be located on the west side of the rail corridor and will be a concrete box structure founded on deep foundations (micropiles, H-piles, or caissons). It will interface with the soldier pile with lagging wall for the rail corridor dive down. The utilities chamber will have 1.5 m thick exterior walls, a minimum 1.5 m thick bottom slab, and a 0.5 m thick top slab. Two 1 m thick interior walls will also be constructed inside the utilities chamber. The utilities chamber will have a clear height and width of 14.4 m and 6.2 m, respectively. Concrete wingwalls will extend off the exterior face of the utilities chamber’s exterior walls.
Two manholes and a grit separator chamber will be located on the east side of the rail corridor confined by a secant wall. Cast-in-place concrete will be placed around the grit separator chamber and formed as a wall for the rail corridor dive down. A concrete shear key will be provided along the grit separator chamber’s bottom slab. 
1.1.1.1


234

2.3.1.4Geotechnical Design
. 
2.3.2Corvette Avenue Grade Separation (STO 15+060)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.2 provided by Metrolinx outlines Stouffville Corridor (Uxbridge Subdivision) requirements for the Grade Separation of Corvette Avenue in section (e).
The PA indicates that the structure shall be a new pedestrian Grade Separation at Corvette Avenue at MP 59.96.
The existing Corvette Avenue and Uxbridge Subdivision intersection is an existing single track at-grade pedestrian crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-35: Existing Plan View of Corvette Avenue Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-36: Existing Street View of Corvette Avenue Crossing (Looking East)
2.3.2.1Design of Structure
The superstructure design for the Corvette Avenue Grade Separation will be a steel truss structure carrying pedestrians over the rail corridor’s two tracks (one existing, one new). The substructure will be conventional concrete piers supported on H-piles. A switchback ramp structure and a stair structure will also be provided for the pedestrian bridge. The preferred staging option includes a diversion track that will be located adjacent to the existing track, on the south side. The structure will have a single span measuring 23 m and a total width of 4.9 m. A 7.6 m minimum vertical clearance will be provided to the structure’s soffit. The switchback ramp structure will be 88.7 m long on the west side and 81.1 m long on the east side of the pedestrian bridge. RSS walls will be used to support the ramp structure at the shorter sections and concrete pier columns supported on spread footings will be used at the taller sections approaching the pedestrian bridge. The stair structure will be steel, with platforms supported by HP sections on pad footings. 
Refer to Corvette Avenue Grade Separation Bridge Plan, Elevation, and Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00042, Corvette Avenue Grade Separation Ramp Plan, Elevation, Section, and Details RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00043, and Corvette Avenue Grade Separation Ramp Stairs Plan, Elevation, Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00044. 
2.3.2.2Geotechnical Design

 
2.3.2.3

2.3.2.4

2.3.3Progress Avenue Grade Separation (STO 20+233)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.2 provided by Metrolinx outlines Stouffville Corridor (Uxbridge Subdivision) requirements for the Grade Separation of Progress Avenue in Section (h).
The PA indicates that the structure shall be a new Road over Rail Grade Separation at Progress Avenue at MP 56.72.
The Grade Separation shall be an overhead structure supporting the New Municipal Infrastructure (Progress Avenue over the Network).
The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained.
ONxpress shall provide a 2.1m wide sidewalk, to City of Toronto Standards, along the east side of William Kitchen Road from the NE corner of Progress Ave and William Kitchen Road to the north of the 1 William Kitchen existing vehicular entrance.
ONxpress shall provide a ramp and drop curb at the parking lot to provide pedestrian access to the 1 William Kitchen Road property.
The existing Progress Avenue and Uxbridge Subdivision intersection is an existing single track at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-37: Existing Plan View of Progress Avenue Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-38: Existing Street View of Progress Avenue Crossing (Looking East)
To accommodate the road-over-rail grade separation at the Progress Avenue and rail corridor intersection, Progress Avenue will have to be regraded on the approaches. There is an existing structure (three-cell concrete box culvert) to the east of the grade separation that carries Progress Avenue over the West Highland Creek that will be impacted by the required regrading on the approaches. Additionally, an access road (Access Road #3) located south of Progress Avenue that crosses the West Highland Creek is required. The following sections describe the Progress Avenue over rail corridor structure, the Progress Avenue over West Highland Creek structure, and the Access Road #3 over West Highland Creek structure. 
The proposed road profile for the Progress Avenue over rail corridor structure and the Progress Avenue over West Highland Creek structure is shown in 239 \* MERGEFORMAT . The proposed road profile for the Access Road #3 over West Highland Creek structure is shown in Error! Reference source not found..

Figure 2-40: Proposed Progress Avenue Road Profile

Figure 2-41: Proposed Profile for Access Road #3
2.3.3.1
2.3.3.1.1Design of Structure
The superstructure design for the Progress Avenue Grade Separation will be prestressed, precast, NU girders carrying Progress Avenue (four vehicle traffic lanes, two sidewalks) over the rail corridor’s two tracks (one existing, one new). The substructure will be integral abutments supported on H-piles. The preferred staging option will have a two-lane road and sidewalk detour along the south side of the structure. The structure will have a single span measuring 23.5 m, a total width of 21.1 m, and a skew of 20°. 6 m long approach slabs will be provided for the roadway at both east and west approaches to the structure. A 7.6 m minimum vertical clearance will be provided to the structure’s soffit and 7.6 m minimum horizontal clearance will be provided to the wall from  of track. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure running parallel to the roadway. The retaining walls will be RSS walls and will wrap around the structure to create false abutments. 
Refer to Progress Avenue Grade Separation Bridge Plan, Elevation, and Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00045, Progress Avenue Grade Separation Typical Details RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00046, Progress Avenue Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00012, Progress Avenue Detour Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00019, Progress Avenue Detour Grade Separation Cross Section RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00020. 
2.3.3.1.2Geotechnical Design 

 
2.3.3.2
2.3.3.2.1Design of 
The superstructure design for the Progress Avenue over West Highland Creek structure will be prestressed, precast, NU girders carrying Progress Avenue (four vehicle traffic lanes, two sidewalks) over West Highland Creek. The substructure will be integral abutments supported on H-piles. The preferred staging option will have a two-lane road and sidewalk detour along the south side of the structure. The structure will have a single span measuring 40 m, a total width of 21.1 m, and a skew of 20°. A 30 m span option was also developed which would require sheet pile walls in front of the abutments. 6 m long approach slabs will be provided for the roadway at both east and west approaches to the structure. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure running parallel to the roadway. All retaining walls will be RSS walls. If the 30 m span option is selected, the RSS walls and will wrap around the structure to create false abutments. 
Refer to Progress Avenue over West Highland Creek Bridge Plan, Elevation, and Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00047, Progress Avenue over West Highland Creek Bridge Plan, Elevation, and Section (30 m Span Option) RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00052, Access Road over West Highland Creek Bridge Plan, Elevation, and Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00048, Progress Avenue Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00012, Progress Avenue Detour Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00019, Progress Avenue Detour Grade Separation Cross Section RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00020. 
2.3.3.2.2Geotechnical Design 

 
2.3.3.3
2.3.3.3.1Design of 
The superstructure design for the Access Road #3 over West Highland Creek structure will be prestressed, precast, NU girders carrying Access Road #3 (two lanes, one sidewalk) over West Highland Creek. The substructure will be integral abutments supported on H-piles. As the road does not currently exist, no road detour during construction is required. The structure will have a single span measuring 29 m, a total width of 10.35 m, and a skew of 10°. 6 m long approach slabs will be provided for the roadway at both east and west approaches to the structure. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure running parallel to the roadway. The retaining walls will be ‘L’-shaped retaining walls.
Refer to Progress Avenue Grade Separation Access Road over West Highland Creek Bridge Plan, Elevation, and Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00048, and Progress Avenue Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00012. 
2.3.3.3.2Geotechnical Design 

 
2.3.3.4


242
2.3.3.5

2.3.4Havendale Road Grade Separation (STO 22+748)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.2 provided by Metrolinx outlines Stouffville Corridor (Uxbridge Subdivision) requirements for the Grade Separation of Havendale Road in Section (d).
The PA indicates that the structure shall be a new pedestrian Grade Separation at Havendale Road at MP 55.16.
ONxpress shall decommission, demolish and remove the existing Grade Crossing of Havendale Road.
ONxpress shall close off Havendale Road on each side of the new pedestrian tunnel;
A barricade and warning sign are required at the limit of the dead-end road in accordance with OPS.
The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained.
The existing roads functional cross section shall be retained.
The existing Havendale Road and Uxbridge Subdivision intersection is an existing single track at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-43: Existing Plan View of Havendale Road Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-44: Existing Street View of Havendale Road Crossing (Looking East)
2.3.4.1Design of Structure
The structure design for the Havendale Road Grade Separation will be a precast concrete box structure carrying the rail corridor’s two tracks (two existing) over the Havendale Road pedestrian path. A switchback ramp structure and stairs leading down to the concrete box structure will also be provided. The structure will have a single span measuring 4.6 m and a total width of 20.3 m. A 3.66 m wide by 2.8 m tall clearance will be provided inside the box structure. The switchback ramp structure will be 43.5 m long on both sides approaching the concrete box structure. ONxpress is currently evaluating the use of an overhead pedestrian bridge at this location as an alternative to the concrete box structure developed during the pursuit phase. This would contradict the PA requirement of constructing a new pedestrian tunnel. 
Refer to Havendale Road Grade Separation Plan, Elevation, and Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00050 and Havendale Road Grade Separation Ramp Sections RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00051.
2.3.4.2Geotechnical Design
 
1.1.1.2


2.3.4.3

2.3.5Huntingwood Drive Grade Separation (STO 23+201)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.2 provided by Metrolinx outlines Stouffville Corridor (Uxbridge Subdivision) requirements for the Grade Separation of Huntingwood Drive in section (g).
The PA indicates that the structure shall be a new Road under Rail Grade Separation at the Huntingwood Drive at MP 54.88 in the Scarborough area within the City of Toronto.
The Grade Separation shall be a subway structure supporting the ONxpress Infrastructure (Huntingwood Drive under the Network). 
The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments of the Network shall be 
The existing Huntingwood Drive and Uxbridge Subdivision intersection is an at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-45: Existing Plan View of Huntingwood Drive Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-46: Existing Street View of Huntingwood Drive Crossing (Looking East)
2.3.5.1Design of Structure
The Huntingwood Grade Separation structure will carry two tracks (two existing) over Huntingwood Drive (two vehicle traffic lanes, two cycle tracks, and two sidewalks). Two structure options were identified: prestressed, precast, concrete box girders or a concrete box with median wall structure. The substructure for the concrete box girder option would be conventional concrete abutments and a pier supported on spread footings. The preferred staging option for the concrete box girder option has been identified as construction with one diversion track located east of the existing intersection and a two-lane road detour located north of the existing intersection. The preferred staging option for the concrete box structure has been identified as construction without diversion tracks using the jack-and-slide construction method and a two-lane road and MUP detour located north of the existing intersection. The concrete box girder structure will have two spans measuring 13.1 m each and a total width of 8.54 m. The concrete box structure will have a 27.4 m span with a median wall in the center and a total width of 8.67 m. The concrete box will have 1.2 m thick walls, a minimum of 1.2 m thick top and bottom slabs, and a 1 m thick median wall. 4 m long approach slabs will be provided for the rail corridor at both north and south approaches to the structure for both options. A 5.3 m minimum vertical clearance will be provided to the structure’s soffit for both options. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure running parallel to the roadway. 
Refer to Huntingwood Grade Separation Bridge Plan, Elevation, Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00038, Huntingwood Grade Separation Bridge Pushed Box Option Plan, Elevation, Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00041, Huntingwood Drive Grade Separation Cross Section RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00007, Huntingwood Drive Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00008, Huntingwood Drive Detour Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-STR-CIV-UX-00015, and Huntingwood Drive Detour Grade Separation Cross Sections RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00016. The proposed road profile is shown in Error! Reference source not found..

Figure 2-47: Proposed Huntingwood Drive Road Profile
2.3.5.2Geotechnical Design

  
2.3.5.3


248

249

2.3.5.4


2.3.6McNicoll Avenue Grade Separation (STO 25+238)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.2 provided by Metrolinx outlines Stouffville Corridor (Uxbridge Subdivision) requirements for the Grade Separation of McNicoll Avenue in section (i).
The PA indicates that the structure shall be a new Road under Rail Grade Separation at the McNicoll Avenue at MP 53.61
The Grade Separation shall be a subway structure supporting the ONxpress Infrastructure
ONxpress to transition McNicoll bike lanes to on-road 1.5m painted bike lanes on each side of the Silver Star south leg as per City of Toronto Standards
ONxpress shall terminate the on-road painted bike lanes at the existing Multi-Use Path at the South terminus of Silver Star Boulevard
The existing McNicoll Avenue and Uxbridge Subdivision intersection is an at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-50: Existing Plan View of McNicoll Avenue Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-51: Existing Street View of McNicoll Avenue Crossing (Looking East)
2.3.6.1Design of Structure
The superstructure design for the McNicoll Avenue Grade Separation will be through-plate girders (TPG) carrying two tracks (two existing) over McNicoll Avenue (four vehicle traffic lanes, two bike lanes, and two sidewalks). The substructure will be conventional concrete abutments supported on spread footings. The preferred staging option will have a four-lane road and MUP detour along the south side of the structure and a diversion track located on the east side of the existing intersection. Temporary shoring will be provided during construction to accommodate the detour. The structure will have a single span measuring 24.1 m and a total width of 13.1 m. 4 m long approach slabs will be provided for the rail corridor at both north and south approaches to the structure. A 5.3 m minimum vertical clearance will be provided to the structure’s soffit. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure running parallel to the roadway. 
Refer to McNicoll Avenue Grade Separation Options Evaluation Report RER3-WSH-STR-RPT-UX-00016, McNicoll Avenue Grade Separation Bridge Plan, Section, and Elevation RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00049, McNicoll Avenue Grade Separation Cross Section RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00009, McNicoll Avenue Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00010, McNicoll Avenue Detour Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00017, McNicoll Avenue Detour Grade Separation Cross Section RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00018. The road profile is shown in Error! Reference source not found..

Figure 2-52: Proposed McNicoll Avenue Road Profile
2.3.6.2Geotechnical Design

  
2.3.6.3Design of Roadway


253

2.3.6.4


2.3.7Denison Street Grade Separation (STO 27+887)
The Project Agreement (PA) Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.2 provided by Metrolinx outlines Stouffville Corridor (Uxbridge Subdivision) requirements for the Grade Separation of Denison Street in Section (j).
The PA indicates that the structure shall be a new Road under Rail Grade Separation at the Denison Street at MP 51.98.
The Grade Separation shall be a subway structure supporting the ONxpress Infrastructure (Denison Street under Network).
The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained. 
The existing Denison Street and Uxbridge Subdivision intersection is an at-grade crossing. Plan and Street View of the existing intersection can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-54: Existing Plan View of Denison Street Crossing (North is up)

Figure 2-55: Existing Street View of Denison Street Crossing (Looking East)
2.3.7.1Design of Structure
The superstructure design for the Denison Street Grade Separation will be prestressed, precast, concrete box girders carrying two tracks (two existing) over Denison Street (four vehicle lanes and two sidewalks). The substructure will be conventional concrete abutments and a pier supported on spread footings. The preferred staging option will have a two-lane road and sidewalk detour along the south side of the structure and a diversion track located on the west side of the existing intersection. The structure will have two spans measuring 13.66 m each, a total width of 8.54 m, and a skew of 24.4°. 4 m long approach slabs will be provided for the rail corridor at both north and south approaches to the structure. A 5.3 m minimum vertical clearance will be provided to the structure’s soffit. Retaining walls are required at all four quadrants of the structure running parallel to the roadway. 
Refer to Denison Street Grade Separation Bridge Plan, Sections, and Elevations RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-UX-00039, Denison Street Grade Separation Cross Section RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00005, Denison Street Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00006, Denison Street Detour Grade Separation Plan and Profile RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00013, Denison Street Detour Grade Separation Cross Section RER3-WSH-CIV-DRG-UX-00014. The road profile is shown in Error! Reference source not found..

Figure 2-56: Proposed Denison Street Road Profile
2.3.7.2Geotechnical Design

  
2.3.7.3


257

2.3.7.4


2.4Kitchener – Weston-Guelph
2.4.1Islington Avenue Bridge Modifications (KIT 16+750)
The PA Part C, Schedule C-6, Section B.4.5 provided by Metrolinx outlines Kitchener requirements for the bridge modification of Islington Avenue bridge structure.
ONxpress shall provide modification of the existing road bridge over the railway corridor on the Weston Subdivision (MP 10.41).
ONxpress shall provide a new retaining/crash wall beneath the south side of the Islington Avenue Bridge on the Weston Subdivision at MP 10.41 in the City of Toronto (Etobicoke) to accommodate a new fourth track between the pier and the abutment.
The central span of the original bridge spans over three (3) existing railway tracks. All existing and new foundations are founded on dense grey silt with sand and gravel particles. Plan and track view of the existing bridge can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-58: Existing Plan View of Islington Avenue Bridge (North is up)

Figure 2-59: Existing Track View of Crossing (Looking West)
2.4.1.1Design of Structure
A future track is intended to be located beneath the southern span, near the existing south abutment. It will run parallel and at approximately the same elevation as the existing tracks. The existing embankment in front of the south abutment will need to be cut back and retained to accommodate the future track. The existing elevation of the structure showing existing grading near the south abutment that will be excavated and retained is shown in Error! Reference source not found. below.

Figure 2-60: East Elevation view of Existing Islington Avenue Bridge 
The preferred permanent retaining solution is to construct an L-Wall with a shear key and vertical ground anchors. The length of retaining wall required will be approximately 8 m running adjacent to the south abutment. Refer to Islington Avenue L-Wall Plan, Elevation, Section RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-WN-00001. 
2.4.1.2Geotechnical Design


2.4.1.3

2.4.2Pearson Airport Rail Link Spur Bridge Modification
The Pearson Airport Rail Link Spur is from 8.125 km to 10.841 km on an elevated guideway. At the Pearson Airport Terminal Station, the platform height allows for level boarding for the Nippon Sharyo DMU train sets that are currently in use. At the station, the bridge deck comprises of a cast in-situ deck supported by structural steel plate girders. The rail fasteners are attached to discrete concrete plinths 2.75m long, 0.95m wide with an average height of 0.157m. For the remainder of the guideway the bridge deck comprises of a cast in-situ deck supported by precast concrete CPCI girders. Plan and elevation view of the existing bridge can be seen in Error! Reference source not found. and Error! Reference source not found., respectively.

Figure 2-61: Existing Plan View from EP19 to Platform (North is Up)

Figure 2-62: Existing Elevation View from EP19 to Platform (Looking West)
New rolling stock (E-LOCO-train sets) will replace the existing Nippon Sharyo DMU vehicles. As such, the platform height above top of rail needs to be reduced from 1.219m to 0.533m. Lowering the platform level was deemed not feasible, and thus the level of the rail will be raised by 686 mm instead. Additionally, the platform at Pearson Station needs to be extended to increase the number of vehicles per train from three to four. 
Refer to WSP-Hatch Airport Rail Link Spur Bridge Modification Assessment Report RER3-WSH-STR-RPT-PER-00001 for proposed track design options and a preliminary structural review of the existing structure’s load capacity. Refer to Pearson Airport Rail Link Spur Bridge Rail-Structure-Interaction Analysis Report RER3-WSH-STR-RPT-PER-00002 and Pearson Airport Rail Link Spur Bridge Deck and Substructure Strengthening Assessment Report RER3-WSH-STR-RPT-PER-00003. Further verifications of the structural implications will be carried out once the preferred alignment has been selected. 
2.4.2.1

3.Abbreviations
Table 3-1 below presents abbreviations that are commonly used in the Project Agreement, Metrolinx ONxpress, Regulators and other stakeholders’ documentation. Some of the terms used are acronyms developed by ONxpress to organize the work of the RER3 program.

Table 3-1: List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Name
BAR
Barrie – Newmarket GO railway line
BIM
Building Information Model
C5
Schedule C-5 of the Project Agreement
C6
Schedule C-6 of the Project Agreement
CDS
Construction Document Submittal
CJV
Construction Joint Venture
COT
City of Toronto
DDD
Design Development Definition
DDS
Design Development Submission
EA
Environmental Assessment
EJV
Engineering Joint Venture
GTA
Greater Toronto Area
IFC
Issued for Construction
IFP
Issued for Permit
IFT
Issued for Tender
IO
Infrastructure Ontario
KIT
Kitchener – Weston-Guelph GO railway line
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LOD
Level of Detail
LOI
Level of Information
LOS
Level of Service
LSE
Lakeshore East GO railway line
LSW
Lakeshore West GO railway line
MAPP
Metrolinx Asset Protection Plan
MTO
Ministry of Transportation Ontario
MX
Metrolinx
OCS
Overhead Catenary System
OPSD
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawing
PA
Project Agreement
PLAA
Permits, , Approvals and Agreements
PS
Paralleling Station
PSOS
Project Specific Output Specifications
RCD
Reference Concept Design
RER
GO Regional Express Rail
RIC
Richmond Hill – Bala GO railway line
SOW
Scope of Work
SPA
Site Plan Control Approval
SWS
Switching Station
TEDI
Thermal Energy Demand Intensity
TGS
Toronto Green Standards
TRCA
Toronto Region Conservation Authority
TPAP
Transit Project Assessment Process
TPFs
Traction Power Facilities
TPSS
Traction Power Sub Station
TTC
Toronto Transit Commission
USEP
Union Station Enhancement Project
USRC
Union Station Rail Corridor
4.Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
4.1Standards, Codes and Regulations 
Unless specifically stated otherwise, the design of all buildings, structures and related facilities shall be based on applicable parts of the following codes, specifications, standards, regulations, and other references. In addition to these, the design shall comply with any laws or regulations of local authorities. In the event of conflicting requirements, the most stringent shall apply. The design shall comply with the requirements of all statutory bodies having jurisdiction over any part of the work including Fire, Building and Local Authorities including, but not limited to those listed in Error! Reference source not found..
Table 4-1: Standards, Codes and Regulations
Abbreviation
Name
OBC
Ontario Building Code, 2012
-
Ministry of Transportation Structural Manual [2021]
-
Ministry of Transportation Concrete Culvert Design and Detailing Manual [2000]
-
Ministry of Transportation RSS Design Guidelines [2008]
NECB
National Energy Code of Canada for Buildings [2017]
CGBC
Canada Green Building Council
OFC
Ontario Fire Code, [2022]
NFPA 101
National Fire Protection Association, Life Safety Code [2020]
NFPA 130
National Fire Protection Association, Standard for Fixed Guideway Transit and Passenger Rail Systems, [2020]
CAN/CSA
Canadian Standards Association
CHBDC
Canadian Highway Bridges Design Code [2019]
AREMA
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association [2019]
AISC
American Institute of Steel Construction
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
ASHRAE
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials
FM Global
Factory Mutual Global
ISO
International Standards Organization
MBMA
Metal Buildings Manufacturers Association
OHSA
Ontario Health and Safety Act
UL
Underwriters Laboratories
ULC
Underwriters Laboratories for Canada
4.2Stakeholders Standards 
The following general design standards, codes and guidelines are followed or referred to where applicable. Not listed Metrolinx or other stakeholder standards are considered to not be a requirement for this project:
Table 4-2: Stakeholders Standards and Guidelines
Abbreviation
Name
MX DRM
GO Design Requirements Manual, 2020
-
GO Transit Track Standards RC-0506-02TRK
-
Metrolinx Asset Protection Package
MX DGL-02
Vegetative Screens v1.1
RC-0506-04STR
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridge and Structures, 2018
Metrolinx standards, specifications, guidelines, bulletins, and other documents not listed in the table are not considered applicable to the extent of this project scope of work. 
4.3Safety in Design
The safety of personnel and equipment is of paramount importance to all stakeholders and will be reflected in the civil design. This section sets out the design safety philosophy which emphasizes compliance with legislation, standards, safety in design principles.  
The design shall incorporate all requirements of the latest edition of the Canada Occupational Health and Safety Regulations (SOR/86-304), amended on December 7, 2012.

5.Bridge Structure Design Criteria
In the case of a discrepancy between design criteria, the more specific requirements set out in this basis of design document will take precedence over the more general requirements. Where an obvious conflict exists between design criteria, consultation with the Contracting Authority will to resolve the conflict.
5.1Design Loads
5.1.1Dead Loads
All dead loads or permanent loads will be as specified in the Ontario Building Code (OBC), National Building Code of Canada (NBCC), Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code S6:19 (CHBDC), American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association Manual (AREMA) and Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges. Table 5-1 below presents the summarized dead loads that will be used.
Table 5-1: Dead loads
Description
Design Parameter
Self-weight of Concrete
24 kN/m3
Self-weight of Steel
78 kN/m3
 material 
19 kN/m3
Ballast, including track ties
19 kN/m3
Track rails, inside guardrails and fastenings
3 kN/m
Dead load on ballast deck bridge
Minimum 405 mm of ballast to top of tie plus 305 mm of ballast for future track surfacing
5.1.2Live Loads
5.1.2.1Rail Vehicle Live Load 
Per Project Agreement (PA) Schedule C-6, A3.3 (e), rail live loads will based on Cooper E-80 or Alternative Live Load in compliance with the AREMA Manual, Volume 2 – Structures; whichever produces the greater stresses, unless otherwise superseded by requirements identified in the GO Transit Track Standards (GTTS). The Cooper E-80 live load and Alternative Live Load and show in Figure 5-1 and Figure 5-2, respectively. 

Figure 5-1: Cooper E 80 Load (AREMA Figure 15-1-2)

Figure 5-2: Alternative Live Load on Four Axles (AREMA Figure 15-1-3)
5.1.2.1.1Impact Load
An impact force due the sum of vertical effects and rocking effect will be applied vertically to the top of each rail per AREMA Chapter 15 clause 1.3.5. The impact load due to vertical effects will be equal to the following percentages of live load:
For L less than 80 feet:		40 - 30L2/1600
For L 80 feet or more:		16 + 600/(L - 30)
where L is in feet, measured center-to-center of supports for stringers, transverse floorbeams without stringers, longitudinal girders and trusses (main members), or of the longer adjacent supported stringers, longitudinal beams, girder or truss for impact in floorbeams, floorbeam hangers, subdiagonals of trusses, transverse girders, supports for longitudinal and transverse girders, and viaduct columns. 
Impact load due to rocking effect will be 20% of the wheel load without the vertical impact force, acting downward on one rail and upward on the other. The load couple will be applied to produce the greatest force in the member being considered. 
For members receiving load from more than one track, the impact load shall be applied on the number of tracks as noted in Table 15-1-5 of AREMA Chapter 15. 
5.1.2.1.2Centrifugal Force
For structures supported tracks on a curved alignment, a centrifugal force will be applied horizontally through a point 8 ft (2.4 m) above the top of rail per AREMA Chapter 15 clause 1.3.6. Where the design speed is not specified, the centrifugal force will be 15% of each axle load without the impact load. The superelevation of the outer rail used to determine the point of application can be assumed as 6 in (152 mm). 
Where the maximum design speed and superelevation are specified, the centrifugal force will correspond to the percentage of each axle load without the impact load, determined by:
C = 0.00117S2D
where: 	C = centrifugal factor, percent
S = speed, miles per hour
D = degree of curve (central angle of curve subtended by a chord of 100 ft)
5.1.2.1.3Road Vehicle Live Load 
Road live load shall be determined in accordance with the CHBDC, clause 3.8.3 and Annex A3.4 for CL-625-ONT loading. The truck section, truck loading, and lane loading for the CL-625-ONT vehicle are shown in Figure 5-3, Figure 5-4, and Figure 5-5, respectively. 

Figure 5-3: CL-625-ONT Truck (CHBDC Figure 3.2)

Figure 5-4: CL-625-ONT Truck Loading (CHBDC Figure A3.4.1)

Figure 5-5: CL-625-ONT Lane Loading (CHBDC Figure A3.4.2)
5.1.3Walkway Load for Rail Bridges
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges Part 2A clause 6.11 indicates walkways and inspection catwalks shall be designed to support a uniformly distributed live load of not less than 4.8 kPa (100psf). AREMA Chapter 15 clause 8.5.3.2 indicates walkways shall be designed to support a uniformly distributed load of not less than 4 kPa (85 psf). Of these specified loads, the most stringent (the PA load of 4.8 kPa) will apply to structure design.
5.1.4Pedestrian Load for Road Bridges
Pedestrian loads will be calculated per CHBDC clause 3.8.9 and will be applied to sidewalks along road bridges. The load will not be less tha 1.6 kPa and will not be greater than 4.0 kPa. Where the pedestrian load is considered with vehicle traffic loads, the pedestrian load will be reduced by 20%.
5.1.5Environmental Loads
Snow, rain, ice, ice accretion, and wind loads will be applied to the structures as described in the design codes listed in Section 4.1. All wind loads will be based on the reference wind pressures noted in the CHBDC Table A3.1.1 and shall be treated as equivalent static loads. The wind load acting on a vehicle live load will be determined in accordance with CHBDC clause 3.10.2.4 and will be applied to the structure at a height of 3 m above the roadway surface for roadway bridges and 1.5 m for pedestrian bridges. The wind load acting on a railway live load will be per AREMA Chapter 8 clause 2.2.3. A uniform line load of 4.4 kN/m shall be applied 245 mm above the top of rail in a horizontal direction perpendicular to the  of the track. 
5.1.6Seismic Loads
Seismic site classification and response shall follow NBCC and OBC, as applicable. Per PA Schedule C-6, the importance classification factors for seismic design of new civil structures supporting railway traffic shall be an Immediate Safety Factor of 4 and an Immediate Value Factor of 4. New structures will be designed to resist seismic loading.  Seismic analysis will use a dual-level seismic design criterion with an upper-level design earthquake to provide a life safety performance objective. The upper-level design earthquake is a Maximum Design Earthquake (MDE) where the probability of exceedance is approximately 4 percent in the 100-year design life, or 2 percent probability exceedance in 50 years, as specified in the NBCC. The design parameters of peak ground acceleration shall be determined in accordance with NBCC Clause 4.1.8.4 and Table 4.1.8.4. The structures will be designed with adequate strength and ductility to resist loads and deformations imposed on the structures during the MDE. Temporary works will be designed for a lower-level design earthquake. The lower-level design earthquake shall be the Operating Design Earthquake (ODE) where the probability of exceedance is approximately 20 percent in 100 years, or 10 percent in 50 years, as specified in the NBCC.
5.1.7Earth Loads
Where soil is being retained by a structure, lateral soil loading will be considered and designed for. Per PA Schedule C-6, a train live load surcharge for geotechnical design of earthworks and other below-grade structures directly or indirectly subjected to railroad loading will be applied to the structures where appropriate. A lateral compaction surcharge load varying linearly from 12 kPa at fill surface to 0 kPa at a depth of 1.7 m will be applied to structures where appropriate per CHBDC clause 6.12.3. The live load surcharge and lateral soil loads on abutments and retaining walls shall be calculated in accordance with AREMA Chapter 8, clause 20.3.2.2 (a) and CHBDC clause 3.7. Figure 5-6 below shows the lateral loading diagram given by the Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridge and Structures manual.

Figure 5-6: Lateral Loading Diagram (Metrolinx Drawing F4i)
5.1.8Hydrostatic Pressures 
Per PA Schedule C-6 Section C.14.9(b)(v)A, groundwater levels up to 0.3 m above the 100-year floor level will be considered and applied to the structures as hydrostatic pressures. Hydrostatic pressures will be applied laterally, varying linearly to the defined groundwater elevation. Hydrostatic pressures will also be applied as an uplift force to founding or bottom slabs where applicable.
5.2Load Combinations
The following section describes the load combinations that will be used for the design of structures. Load combinations will conform to AREMA Chapter 8 clause 2.2.3 and Chapter 15 clause 1.3, and CHBDC clause 3.5. Road structures will be designed using load combinations given in CHBDC and railway structures will be designed using load combinations given in AREMA.
5.2.1CHBDC Load Combinations
Table 5-2: Load Combination Legend per CHBDC
Permanent Loads
D
Dead load including vertical effects of earth load (or cover) and surcharges
E
Loads due to earth pressures and hydrostatic pressure, including surcharges but excluding dead load
P
Secondary prestress effects
Transitory Loads 
L
Vehicle live load including, rolling (lurching) force, hunting (nosing) force, and normal acceleration or braking forces
K
Effects of strains due to thermal, shrinkage, and creep
W
Wind load on structure
V
Wind load on traffic 
S
Load due to differential foundation settlement
Expectational Loads 
EQ
Earthquake 
F
Loads due to stream pressure and ice forces or to debris torrents
A
Ice accretion load
H
Collision load arising from highway vehicles or vessels
Table 5-3: Maximum and Minimum Load Factors per CHBDC
Dead Load
Maximum αD
Minimum αD
Factory-produced components, excluding wood
1.10
0.95
Cast-in-place concrete, wood, and all non-structural components
1.20
0.90
Wearing surfaces, based on nominal or specified thickness
1.50
0.65
Earth fill, negative skin friction on pile
1.25
0.80
Water
1.10
0.90
Earth and hydrostatic pressure
Maximum αD
Minimum αD
Passive earth pressure, considered as a load
1.25
0.50
At-rest earth pressure
1.25
0.80
Active earth pressure
1.25
0.80
Backfill pressure
1.25
0.80
Hydrostatic pressure
1.10
0.90
Prestress
Maximum αD
Minimum αD
Secondary prestress effects 
1.05
0.95
Table 5-4: Load Combinations per CHBDC
Load Combination
Permanent Loads
Transitory Loads
Exceptional Loads

D
E
P
L
K
W
V
S
EQ
F
A
H
Fatigue Limit State
FLS combination 1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Serviceability Limit States
SLS combination 1
1
1
1
0.9
0.8
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
SLS combination 2
0
0
0
0.9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Ultimate Limit States
ULS combination 1
αD
αE
αP
1.7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ULS combination 2
αD
αE
αP
1.6
1.15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
ULS combination 3
αD
αE
αP
1.4
1
0.45
0.45
0
0
0
0
0
ULS combination 4
αD
αE
αP
0
1.25
1.4
0
0
0
0
0
0
ULS combination 5
αD
αE
αP
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
ULS combination 6
αD
αE
αP
0
0
0
0
0
0
1.3
0
0
ULS combination 7
αD
αE
αP
0
0
0.7-5
0
0
0
0
1.3
0
ULS combination 8
αD
αE
αP
0/0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
ULS combination 9
1.35
αE
αP
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.2.2AREMA Load Combinations
Table 5-5: Load Combination Legend per AREMA
Design Parameter
Description
D
Dead Load
L
Live Load
I
Impact Load
CF
Centrifugal Force
E
Earth pressure
B
Buoyancy
W
Wind load on structure
WL
Wind load on live load
LF
Longitudinal Force from live load
F
Longitudinal force due to Friction or shear resistance at expansion bearing
EQ
Earthquake 
SF
Stream flow pressure
ICE
Ice pressure
OF
Other forces (rib shortening, shrinkage, temperature and/or settlement of supports)
Table 5-6: Service Load Design per AREMA
Group
Item
Allowable Percentage of Basic Unit Stress
I
D + L + I + CF + E + B + SF
100
II
D + E + B + SF + W
125
III
Group I + 0.5W + WL + LF + F
125
IV
Group I + OF
125
V
Group II + OF
140
VI
Group III + OF
140
VII
Group I + ICE
140
VIII
Group II + ICE
150
Table 5-7: Load Factor Design per AREMA
Group
Item 
I
1.4 (D + 5/3 (L + I) + CF + E + B + SF)
IA
1.8 (D + L + I + CF + E + B + SF)
II
1.4 (D + E + B + SF + W)
III
1.4 (D + L + I + CF + E + B + SF + 0.5W + WL + LF + F)
IV
1.4 (D + L + I + CF + E + B + SF + OF)
V
Group II + 1.4 (OF)
VI
Group III + 1.4 (OF)
VII
1.0 (D + E + B + EQ)
VIII
1.4 (D + L + I + E + B + SF + ICE)
IX
1.2 (D + E + B + SF + W + ICE)
5.3Materials 
It is anticipated that no significant changes to track material will occur. Notably, tracks will be ballasted using either concrete or wood ties.
5.3.1Ballast
The track ballast for the project will conform to the current version of the GO Transit Crushed Rock Track Ballast Specification. Table 5-8 below indicates the specified Ballast mat properties.
Table 5-8: Specified Material Properties for Preferred Ballast Mat System
Material Properties
Characteristic data
Test Method 
Note
Specific static stiffness Cstat
between 0.02 - 0.10 N/mm²
between 0.02 - 0.20 N/mm²

0.100 N/mm³
0.079 N/mm³
DIN 45673-5:2010-08
Evaluation as a secant stiffness (3rd load cycle)
High frequency dynamic stiffening 
Kdyn2 (20 Hz) at preload 0.03 N/mm²  
Kdyn2 (20 Hz) at preload 0.06 N/mm²  
Kdyn2 (20 Hz) at preload 0.10 N/mm²

1.08
1.15
1.06
DIN 45673- 5:2010-08

Mechanical fatigue resistance 
passed
DIN 45673-5:2010-08
TU Munich. Report Nr. 1988
Tensile strength of resilient layer (min) 
1.7 N/mm² DIN 53455
1.7 N/mm² DIN 53455

Water admission in per cent by 
volume 
Resilient + protection layer 
protection layer 
10%

67%
DIN 45673-5:2010-0

5.3.2Concrete 
Concrete strength shall conform to CAN/CSA-A23.1. Table 5-9 below indicates the specified concrete strength by element.
Table 5-9: Specified Concrete Strength by Element
Element
Specified Concrete Strength (f’c at 28 days, MPa)
Precast prestressed elements
50
Abutments, Wingwalls, Decks, and Sidewalks
35
Lean Concrete/Filler Concrete
6
All other structural elements
35
In accordance with the Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures clause 11.2, minimum 24-hour concrete strength at release for prestressed concrete members shall be 35 MPa.
Concrete cover shall be in accordance with the Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures clause 13.1. Table 5-10 below indicates the required concrete cover to reinforcing by conditions. 
Table 5-10: Required Concrete Cover to Reinforcing
Exposure Condition
Minimum Cover
Concrete cast against and permanently exposed to earth
75 mm
Concrete not submerged or exposed to earth or de-icing chemicals:
Principle reinforcing bars
Stirrups elsewhere, ties, and spirals
50 mm
50 mm
Concrete submerged or exposed to earth in nonaggressive environments:
Principle reinforcing bars
Stirrups elsewhere, ties, and spirals
50 mm
50 mm
Concrete subjected to de-icing chemicals or other aggressive environments:
Principle reinforcing bars
Stirrups elsewhere, ties, and spirals
75 mm
75 mm
Soffit of slabs over roadways
Principle reinforcing bars
50 mm
5.3.3Reinforcing
Reinforcing bars shall conform to CSA/CAN G30. Table 5-11 below indicates the required yield strengths by reinforcing type. 
Table 5-11: Required Reinforcing Yield Strengths
Reinforcing Type
Reinforcing Yield Strength
Deformed Bars
Fy = 400MPa
Welded Wire Reinforcing
Mild steel hard drawn wire Fy = 386MPa
Stainless Steel
Fy = 500MPa
Rebar welding will not be used as per the Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures Clause 12.
5.3.4Structural Steel
Table 5-12 below indicates the required structural steel grade by element. 
Table 5-12: Required Structural Steel Grade by Element
Structural Steel Element
Structural Steel Grade
Wide Flange Shapes (W)
CAN/CSA G40.20/G40.21 Grade 350W or ASTM A992/A992M Grade 50
Hollow Steel Sections (HSS)
ASTM A500 Grade C
Angles, Plates, and Channels
CAN/CSA G40.20/G40.21 Grade 300W
Table 5-13 below shows the required structural steel grade by fracture critical, non-fracture critical, secondary, and galvanized secondary members as per Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures Chapter 15 – Part 1 clause 1.1.1.
Table 5-13: Required Structural Steel Grade by Member Type
Members
Standards

CSA
ASTM
Fracture Critical Members 
G40.20/G40.21 Grade 350AT or 350WT
Category 5
A709/A709M Grade 50 or 50W
Zone 3 as specified by Metrolinx
Non-Fracture Critical Members
G40.20/G40.21 Grade 350AT or 350WT
Category 3
A709/A709M Grade 50 or 50W
Zone 3 as specified by Metrolinx
Non-Fracture Critical Members/Secondary Members
G40.20/G40.21 Grade 350A or 350W

A588, A709/A709M A572, A36 Grade 50 or 50 W
Galvanized Secondary Members
G40.20/G40.21 Grade 300W
G40.20/G40.21 Grade 350W Class C
A572, A36 Grade 50
A500 Grade C
5.3.5Backfill Material
Minimum factors of safety against sliding shall be at least 1.5. Per AREMA, it is recommended that backfill be compacted to no less than 95% of maximum dry density per ASTM D698 and at a moisture content within 2% of optimum. Backfill shall be placed alternately on each side of the structure and deposited in layers not more than 12 inches (300 mm) thick. The layers shall be horizontal or sloping away from the structure, with each layer carefully tamped.
5.3.6Waterproofing System
To protect the structures from surrounding groundwater, all steel and concrete decks shall be waterproofed. The preferred High Performance Waterproofing system shall conform to the current version of the Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures. The concrete mix design for box culverts used for pedestrian tunnel applications and all other buried structures adjacent to the tunnel shall contain a crystalline waterproofing admixture.
5.3.7Electrification Protective Barriers
Electrification Protective Barriers (EPB) specified according to the Metrolinx classification system developed with the municipalities from across the GO Transit service area. Per PA, Schedule C-6, Section D.2.6 (b)(iv)&(vi), ONxpress shall provide the dimensional criteria for EPB design as following:
Provide solid faced EPB, minimum 2.0m height above the standing surface and non-climbable;
Provide, on Overhead Bridges, a solid faced EPB to be extended to 3.0m horizontally beyond and perpendicular to outside wire running beneath the bridge; and extend 5.0m beyond and perpendicular to the centre of the outside electrified track;
Provide additional EPB where wingwalls or adjacent structures allow access within 3.0m of live portions of the OCS systems;
Provide clearances by constructing and maintaining protective screening and EPB for standing surfaces in restricted areas, in compliance with CSA, EN50122-1, OESC, NESC.
Per PA, Schedule C-6, Section D.6.5 defines the design methodology to make the determination of test level of the EPB as following:
Overhead road bridges with posted speed < 70km/h, EPB shall be TL-2 or TL-4 as per CSA S6-19;
Overhead road bridges with posted speed ≥ 70km/h, EPB shall be TL-4 as per CSA S6-19;
For Aesthetics requirements, refer to PA, Schedule C-6 Appendix Section 2. 
Design references that will be used for the EPB include:
CSA S6-19 Clause 12.4.3.4.6.2, Zone of Intrusion. 
TBC
5.4Serviceability (Deflection, Cracking, and Vibration) Criteria
Serviceability criteria will include deflections, cracking, and structure vibration. All structural components subject to flexure will be designed to have adequate stiffness to limit deflections that adversely affect the strength and serviceability of the structure. 
The Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Part 2A clause 1.4 limits live load deflection to 1/750 and AREMA Chapter 15 clause 1.2.5 limits live load deflection to 1/640 for simple spans. Metrolinx Guidelines Part 2A states that if there is a conflict between the guideline and the AREMA manual sections, Metrolinx guidelines shall apply and supersede the AREMA sections where the deflection limits shall be 1/750.
Per PA, Schedule C-6, Section 14.9 (c)(vi), for Union Station structural design requirements, the deflection for the members supporting train loads under live loading (including impact loading) will be limited to 1/1000 of the span for interior spans and 1/500 for cantilever arm lengths. The PA also indicates that incremental deflection as a result of maximum incremental total load (dead and live loads after track installation) shall be limited to 1/500 of the span for interior spans and 1/250 for cantilever arm lengths.
For road bridges, the deflection limit will not exceed the limits shown in Figure 5-7, as per CHBDC clause 3.4.4. 

Figure 5-7: Deflection Limits for Road Structures
5.5Design Life
The PA Table A.3-1 provides the minimum design life requirements for various assets. Minimum design life relevant to assets discussed in this report are presented in Table 5-14.
Table 5-14: Design Components and Minimum Design Life
Asset
Design Life Required (years)
New Roadway Bridge Structures
75
New Railway Bridge Structures
100
New Permanent Roadway Retaining Walls
75
New Permanent Railway Retaining Walls
100
New Temporary Retaining Walls
5
Tunnel – Structure
100
5.6Clearances
Metrolinx Standard Clearance Diagram for All New Railway Bridges K1U-10.1m indicates the required rail vehicle clearance and is presented in Figure 5-8 below. The vertical clearance will conform to the “for electrification” value. 

Figure 5-8: Rail Vehicle Clearance Diagram
For curved tracks, the lateral clearance on each side of the track centerline will be increased 40 mm per degree of curvature as noted in AREMA Chapter 15 clause 1.2.6. 
In addition, per PA, Schedule C-6, Section B.1(f), Table B.1.1 and Table B.1.2 provided the clearance envelopes requirements on Metrolinx Territory and Non-Metrolinx Territory, respectively. Per PA, Schedule C-6, B.4.2 (b)(i), Scarborough Junction – Kingston Subdivision, Clause A provides: ONxpress shall provide the minimum vertical clearance above the New Uxbridge South Track under the Grade Separation structure shall be 6282 mm from top of rail to underside of structure. And for the Roadway Design, per PA, Schedule C-6, Appendix F, Table F-1 to F-10 provide the required minimum vertical clearance. 
Metrolinx Standard Drawing K1U-10.2m indicates a minimum horizontal clearance 8535mm where overhead wires are required, with or without a maintenance road and is presented in 5-9 below. Metrolinx Standard Drawing K1U-10.3 indicates a minimum horizontal 
clearance of 5485mm for an abutment on piles with a Retained Soil System (RSS) in the front and no crash walls, where there are no overhead wires and no maintenance road and is presented in Figure 5-10 below. Abutment on piles with an RSS wall in front was indicated by CJV (AECON and FCC) as the preferred substructure type. Both standard drawings indicate a vertical clearance of 7595mm for electrification. The AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering, 2019 indicates that piers supporting bridges over railways with a horizontal clear distance of 7600mm or less from the centerline of a railroad track shall be protected by a reinforced concrete crash wall. Considering the Metrolinx Standard Drawings and AREMA Manual, the horizontal clearance required without the construction of a crash wall ranges from 5485mm to 8535mm.

5-9: Typical cross section for horizontal clearance requirements

Figure 5-10: Typical section for horizontal clearance requirement for abutments on piles
5.7Crash wall
If the design identifies the requirement for the railway traffic collision protection, the structural components will be design in compliance with:
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridge and Structures, 2018
AREMA Manuel
AECOM, Submission Guidelines for Crash Walls
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) and Railway Association of Canada (RAC) Proximity Initiative, Guidelines for New Development in Proximity to Railway Operation
Based on AREMA 2.1.5.1 Adjacent to Railroad Tracks, to limit damage by the redirection and deflection of railroad equipment, piers supporting bridges over railways and with a clear distance of 7600mm or less from the centerline of railroad track shall be of heavy construction or shall be protected by a reinforced concrete crash wall. Crash walls for piers from 3600mm to 7600mm clear from centerline of track shall have a minimum of 1800mm above the top of rail. Piers less than 3600mm clear from the centerline of track shall have a minimum crash wall height of 3600mm above the top of rail.
The crash wall shall be at least 760mm thick and 3600mm long. When two or more columns compose a pier, the crash wall shall connect the columns and extend at least 300mm beyond the outermost columns parallel to the track. The crash wall shall be anchored to the footings and columns, if applicable, with adequate reinforcing steel and shell extend to at least 1200mm below the lowest surrounding grade.
Piers shall be considered heavy construction if they have a cross sectional area equal to or greater than that required for the crash wall and the larger of its dimensions is parallel to track.
Consideration may be given to providing protection for bridge piers over 7600mm from the centerline of track as conditions warrant. In making this determination, account shall be taken of such factors as horizontal and vertical alignment of the track, embankment height, and an assessment of the consequences of serious damage in the case of a collision.




5.8Barriers and Railing Heights for Pedestrian Sidewalks and Walkways
Where road structures carry pedestrian movement, a barrier height of 1.05 m will be provided. For structures carrying bicycles, a barrier height of 1.37 m will be used per CHBDC Table 12.8.
Handrail heights for rail structure walkways will be a minimum of 1.1 m per AREMA Chapter 15 clause 8.5.2.1.
5.9Bearings
Per Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures Part 4 clause 2, the preferred bearing types are as follows:
For steel spans:
Bridge spans < 9.1 m in length
Elastomeric Bearings
Sliding Plate Bearings
Bridge spans 9.1 m < L < 16.7 m in length
Elastomeric Bearings
Bridge spans > 16.7 m in length
Spherical Bronze Alloy (Through Plate Girders, Deck Plate Girders, and skew spans)
Radial Bronze Alloy (Deck Plate Girders)
For concrete spans:
Bridge spans < 8.5 m in length
10 mm thick rubber pads, supplied by Fabreeka or Sortex, or approved equivalent. Other bearing pads may be considered by Rail Corridor Infrastructure-Bridges & Structures and shall only be specified with the prior approval of Rail Corridor Infrastructure-Bridges & Structures. The designer shall submit all pertinent documentation to Rail Corridor Infrastructure-Bridges & Structures for review.
Bridge spans 8.5 m < L < 14.6 m in length
Elastomeric Bearings (strip)
Bridge spans > 14.6 m in length
To be approved by Rail Corridor Infrastructure-Bridges & Structures’
For road bridges, CHBDC clause 11.6.1.2 indicates that the type of bearings specified shall be capable of meeting the required loading and movement. Bearing types include elastomeric bearings, spherical bearings, pot bearings, and disc bearings. The MTO Structural Manual indicates that when selecting a bearing, priority shall be given to elastomeric bearings due to their long-term durability and cost effectiveness. 
6.Retaining Wall Design Criteria
ONxpress shall provide retaining structures where required to accommodate track modifications along the rail corridors. Temporary and permanent retaining walls will also be required for grade separations and structure modification. 
Per PA Schedule C-6, ONxpress shall design and construct all retaining wall structures that will be owned and maintained by Metrolinx and Municipalities regardless of the presence of Railway Traffic in compliance with:
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures, including all references specified therein;
Municipal Standards;
CHBDC; and,
All applicable MTO structural standards and memoranda.
6.1General Design Criteria
6.1.1Retaining Wall Loading
Live load surcharge, earth loads, and hydrostatic pressures will be considered for the design of the retaining walls as described in Section 5.1. 
6.1.2Lateral Displacement of Retaining Walls
Per PA Schedule C-6, the lateral displacement of all temporary and permanent retaining walls supporting railway vehicles shall be limited to maximum of 0.1% of the expected height of the wall.
6.1.3Geotechnical Design of Retaining Walls
Geotechnical investigations and recommendations at retaining wall locations will provide the subsurface conditions (i.e. factored geotechnical resistance, site classification, active, passive, and at-rest pressure coefficients, etc.) required for retaining wall design. At-rest pressure coefficients will be provided by geotechnical engineer recommendation in accordance with the Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures Clause 20.3, but shall not be less than 0.5.
TBC by geotechnical team
6.1.4Retaining Wall Surface Patterns
Per PA Schedule C-6, B.4.1 (c), retaining wall surface patterns shall be selected and agreed to with the Municipality from the Metrolinx Standard DS-16 – Concrete Wall Surface Patterns – GO Transit Rail Corridors, Version 1.2, August 2020, inclusive of anti-graffiti coating.
6.2Types of Retaining Walls
Several retaining wall types will be used throughout the RER3 program. Retaining wall types were identified during the pursuit phase as presented in Typical Retaining Wall Sections RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-ALL-00058. A pros and cons list for the retaining wall types was also developed during the pursuit phase as Retaining Wall Pros and Cons List RER3-WSH-STR-LST-ALL-00001. Table 6-1 below describes the types of retaining walls and their possible use scenarios. 
Table 6-1: Proposed Types of Retaining Walls
Types 
Description
Possible Scenarios
Secant Pile Wall
Formed by constructing alternating king and filler piles. Filler piles partially cut into either side of the primary piles in order to form a continuous, impervious structure. 
Suitable for narrow footprint and tall retained heights 4 m and taller in a cut area.
Sheet Pile Wall
Rolled steel section consisting of a plate with integral interlocks on each edge.
Can be in cantilever or anchored.
Suitable for narrow footprint and generally retained heights less than 4.5 m in a cut area.
Soldier pile with concrete lagging wall
Steel piles are installed in the ground around the excavation perimeter before excavation is started.
When excavation begins, horizontal lagging is installed between the piles to retain the soil. 
Can be in cantilever or anchored.
Suitable for narrow footprint. If in cantilever, can be used for retained heights less than 3 m with no live load surcharge. If anchored, can be used for retained heights up to 4.5 m.
Retained Soil System (RSS) Wall
A composite structure consisting of alternating layers of compacted backfill and soil reinforcement elements, fixed to a wall facing.
Where sufficient ROW is available for the RSS wall straps, suitable for retained heights greater than 2 m with no live load surcharge.
Metrolinx approval is required for locations with live load surcharge. 
L-Wall
Reinforced concrete ‘L’-shaped retaining wall. 
Suitable for retained heights less than 2.2 m with live load surcharge. 
T-Wall
A gravity retaining wall system, consisting of modular precast concrete units and select backfill.
The concrete units are faced with monolithic perpendicular stems, forming the shape of a “T”. 
The stems internally stabilize the wall, providing pullout resistance against the lateral earth pressure exerted on the back of the facing.
Suitable for retained heights greater than 2.2 m with live load surcharge. Top stem shall not be placed directly under tracks.
Toe wall
Cast-in-place concrete wall as per OPSD 3120.100
Suitable for cut and fill up to retained heights of 1.8 m with no live load surcharge.
Grande wall
Precast concrete block wall consisting of modular block concrete facings used without soil reinforcement to function as an externally stabilized gravity wall.
Suitable for cut and fill up to retained heights of 1.8 m to 2 m tall wall with no live load surcharge.
Gabion Wall
Composed of orthogonal wire cages or baskets tied together and filled with rock fragments.
Suitable for cut and up to retained heights of 3 m.
7.OCS Foundation Design Criteria
This section outlines the design criteria for Overhead Catenary System (OCS) foundations supporting OCS poles required for the RER3 program. OCS poles and foundations will be required along all rail corridors to support the OCS cables. 
The PA Part C, Schedule C-6 provided by Metrolinx outlines structural requirements for the OCS pole and foundation design:
Environmental and climatic load shall be determined in accordance with CSA C22.3 No. 1 and the AREMA Manual. 
ONxpress shall install the OCS poles and foundations to avoid conflicts with existing underground obstructions.
ONxpress shall provide the OCS pole foundations at Station platforms to meet applicable requirements for passenger safety and movement as defined in Schedule B2-6 - Station Operations.
ONxpress shall provide the OCS structure and guy foundations with adequate protrusion above finished grade to prevent damage from water, wear, and collision.
OCS structure guy foundations shall be reinforced concrete type. The guy strand, fastening, tensioning, and anchorage equipment must be set above the top of finished concrete to avoid damage and corrosion
ONxpress shall provide the OCS foundations and structure to limit deflection at contact wire height as required by the AREMA Manual.
An OCS Foundations Option Evaluation Report RER3-WSH-STR-RPT-ALL-00001 was developed during the pursuit phase. Several OCS pole types are required due to varying design factors such as spans between OCS poles, number of, and types of cables to be supported, and vertical/horizontal loading. The various OCS pole equipment types are as follows: 
Independent Mast - Single Equipment 
Independent Mast - Double Equipment 
Half Portal (TTC) - Single Equipment 
Half Portal (TTC) - Double Equipment 
4 tracks portal mast 
6 tracks portal mast 
Anchor stays
The preferred OCS foundation types are reinforced concrete caissons, and/or steel pipe piles. 
Design references that will be used for the OCS pole foundation design include: 
AREMA Volume 2, Chapter 8, Part 4:  Pile Foundations 
AREMA Volume 2, Chapter 8, Part 12:  Cantilever Poles  
Guidelines for the Design of High Mast Pole Foundations, 4th Ed. (deflection limits)
OCS Load Calculation Report provided by ONxpress, dated 2023/02/08.
8.Noise Wall Foundation Design Criteria
Noise walls will be required at various structure locations to provide noise mitigation measures for surrounding areas. Noise walls may be required to be mounted on structures and retaining walls at some locations. These structures and retaining walls will be designed to resist the additional loading imposed by the noise walls. 
Noise walls shall be designed to withstand a 50-year return period wind pressure determined on a site-specific basis or a wind pressure of 520 Pa, whichever is greater. Site-specific wind pressures will be determined as described in Section 5.1.3.
References that will be used for noise walls include:
Metrolinx Noise Barrier Design Requirements DS-28; and,
CSA Z107.9, Standard for Certification of Noise Barriers.
9.Pumping Station Design Criteria
9.1Civil Drainage
9.1.1Pumping Station and Dewatering System Requirements






























9.2Electrical
ee Section 199.1
9.3Instrumentation and Controls / SCADA
SCADA scope for pumping stations and dewatering will include SCADA-based control and monitoring system, and interface that complies with Operating Authority Standards (i.e., City of Toronto, City of Markham, or Region of York Standards) depending on the location on pumping stations; design will also provide for fully remote operations and monitoring from the respective Main Control Centre, as well as integration of the pumping station into the respective Main Control System.
Assumption is that all the Standards will be shared with the design team before the design starts, and that coordination with City and relevant Municipality will be ongoing during the design process.
The pumping stations’ controls will be designed to be unmanned and capable of remote operation. The pumps will have leak and temperature alarms integrated into the control panel and pumping station alarm and control. The controls shall provide monitoring as a minimum for: station flow, pump run times, and retention tank level over time.
The pumps shall have variable frequency drives (VFD) and controls to be capable of operating over the range of expected flows and ensuring that the pump cycling shall be limited to no more than six starts per hour per pump and in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
A remote backup cellular based auto dialer system will be provided for alarm notification system.The SCADA PLC and local control system shall include a battery backup UPS for a minimum of a 1-hour power outage.
There is a requirement to “provide a CCTV system tied to the PLC”; while the CCTV system will be provided as part of Communications scope, interface with (local) SCADA PLC system will require further clarification from the City and/or Municipality.
All identified interfaces with City and with pumps designers (Mechanical) will be covered in relevant ICD documents.


9.4Communications
9.5
9.6

9.7
9.8Structures
9.8.1


9.8.2















9.8.3





9.8.4




9.8.5




9.8.6
9.8.6.1

9.8.6.2

9.8.6.3



9.8.6.4

9.8.6.5
9.8.6.5.1

9.8.6.5.2




9.8.6.5.3








9.8.6.5.4





9.8.6.5.5





9.8.6.5.6






9.8.6.5.7


9.8.6.6
9.8.6.6.1

9.8.6.6.2












9.8.6.6.3



9.8.6.7


9.8.6.8







9.8.6.9

9.8.6.10

9.8.7
9.8.7.1







9.8.7.2




9.8.7.3












9.8.7.4









9.8.7.5

9.8.7.6
1.1

9.9Mechanical  (HVAC)
9.9.1Codes and Standards
The following is a general list of codes that will be used in the design of the Mechanical design:
•	Ontario Building Code 2012
•	Design Guidelines for Sewage Works (2008)
•	NFPA 820 (Standard for Fire Protection in Wastewater Treatment and Collection Facilities 2016)
9.9.2Design Criteria
9.9.2.1Mechanical ventilation shall be provided at the lift station wet well. Wet well ventilation may be intermittent and at least 30 complete air changes per hour. Air should be forced 	into the wet well by mechanical means rather than solely exhausted from the wet well. 	The ventilating fan should be oriented to blow fresh air into the wet well at a point 900 	mm (36 in) above the high water alarm level. The air change requirements should be based on 100 percent fresh air. The 200mm diameter exhaust air duct will go out and be located above ground with a gooseneck.
9.9.2.2All intermittently operated ventilation equipment should be interconnected with the 		respective well lighting system. Consideration should be given to automatic controls were 	intermittent operation is used. The manual lighting/ventilation switch should override the 	automatic controls. Switches for operation of ventilation equipment should be marked and located conveniently.
9.9.2.3The fan wheel should be fabricated from non-sparking material and explosion/spark proof construction. This, along with standard confined space entry procedures and equipment will help to provide a safe working environment when entry is required, as well as allowing for the use of standard electric hand tools when working within the space. The ductwork in the area will be stainless steel, with strategically located duct openings to ensure that there is air drawn from throughout the chamber. Makeup air motorized damper will be provided with stainless steel ductworks from the above floor. Automatic electrical heater with thermostat should be provided in wet well. Unit heaters to be explosion/spark proof construction.
10.List of Deviations from Project Agreement
Communications scope for pumping stations and dewatering consists of CCTV and Intrusion Access Control (IAC) systems, with accompanying active network equipment and local and backbone cabling. 
Both CCTV and IAC systems will be placed, connected and installed at the site in accordance with City of Toronto or applicable Municipal Standards, depending on the site location. Assumption is that all the Standards will be shared with the design team before the design starts.
CCTV will also be provided for visual monitoring of the submersible wet well style pumping station during day and night.
The signals from cameras, IAC and SCADA will be connected to a local network switch, which will then connect to an interface with backbone network for backhauling to designated central location, as coordinated with the City or Municipality. 
Local switch provision, procurement and configuration as well as interface with backbone network will follow City or Municipality standards and will be coordinated with relevant parties, as well as captured in ICD documents.





 STYLEREF 1 \s 































10.1
11.Civil Infrastructure Design Criteria
This section provides a summary of design criteria, considerations and assumptions used in the design of civil infrastructure on the heavy rail Metrolinx Sub-divisions.
11.1Asset Design Life
Table 10-1: Asset Design Life
Asset
Value
Comments






















11.2

11.3Civil  
The following 



Table 10-2: 








































































11.3.1
11.3.2




11.3.3









11.3.4








11.3.5





11.3.6





 STYLEREF 1 \s 








































12.General Geotechnical Requirements 


The following section provides the general design requirements for the foundation and retaining walls design for both the diversion tracks and project configuration stages. Geotechnical design data for specific structures can be found in their respective sections above.
Foundations for structures shall be designed such that their displacements (Serviceability Limit States) are compatible with the structural design, function, structural performance requirements, and clearance envelope requirements over their design life  
For lateral analysis of caissons, soil springs will be used with the prescribed stiffnesses being based on recommendations from the geotechnical interpretive report 
All concrete superstructures and substructures shall be detailed to mitigate the effects of stray current corrosion. This will require that electrical continuity be provided between steel elements within each concrete structural component  
Deep foundations (drilled caissons) will be designed and constructed to applicable standards
Where temporary shoring walls are required for construction staging, walls will need to be designed to withstand all lateral loads, including from train surcharge, whilst allowing trains to operate safely. This will mean walls are also to have low lateral movements to adequately control rail vertical movements. Walls will likely need to be anchored to achieve this, depending on height and magnitude of lateral load. A typical shoring wall system may include timber lagging, designed to span horizontally between vertical steel soldier piles, sufficiently embedded below the lower ground level. These piles may be anchored at regular vertical centres to control overall lateral deflections, as well as, for reduced bending stresses. Regular monitoring of these walls will be required as per the MAPP requirements
Pavement Design
13.


13.1

13.1.1

13.1.2

13.1.3





13.1.4
13.1.4.1

13.1.4.2


13.2




14.Roads and Walkways

Table 13-1: Roads, and Walkways
Design Element
Parameter
Value
Comment
Intersection with Authority Roads
Regulatory authority

Vehicle types, forecast volumes (existing plus generated) and speeds influence lane requirements, lateral and vertical clearances, intersection geometry (turning paths, queue lengths, island requirements), pavement design, sight distances (horizontal and vertical), etc

Intersection Type



Sight Distance



Design Vehicle



Traffic Volumes



Auxiliary Lanes



Pavement Structure



Pavement Surfacing



Roadside Furniture /Barriers /Signage /Lighting



Design speeds (turning movements and intersecting road)


Carparks
Design Vehicle(s)



No. of Parking Spaces Required (per category)



Bicycle Facilities



Pedestrian Access/Facilities



Parking Configuration /Angle



Traffic Volumes



Signed Speed Limit



Access / egress X-Section (lane widths, shoulder, medians)



Crossfall



Max/Min Vertical Grade



Pavement Structure



Pavement Surfacing



Pavement Design Life



Roadside Furniture /Barriers /Signage /Lighting


Roads Type
Public Road
Access Road
Plant Site Road
Service Road
Haul Road 
Construction Road
(A separate set of criteria should be prepared for each separate road type.)
Regulatory authority

Note: Design vehicle for pavement design and lane width requirements may be different than an occasional vehicle such as crane or forklift that will be the dominating load case for underground pipe structural design.

Design Vehicle



Traffic Volumes



Design Speed



Signed Speed limit



Bicycle Facilities/Lanes etc



Pedestrian Facilities/ Footpaths/ crossings etc.



X-Section (lane widths, shoulders, medians, verge, batters in cut and fill, drain widths and depths)



Alignment design parameters including Max/Min Vertical Grade, horizontal curve parameters (stopping sight distance, overtaking sight distance, side friction factor, curve radius, super elevation) and vertical curve parameters (gradient, grade change, crest and sag curves, superelevation) 



Crossfall and superelevation design parameters



Clearances



Pavement Structure (traffic load, design life, surfacing, primer seal, base, subbase, select layer, subgrade)



Road marking and signage



Roadside Furniture /Barriers /Lighting


14.1General References
Initial Works related to Roadways will be designed as described in Section B4 of Schedule C-6, Part C of the Project Agreement, in compliance with the following applicable Reference Documents, including those listed in this Schedule C-6, Section A General Requirements:
Municipal Standards;
Reference Documents issued by MTO; and
TAC Geometric Design Guide for Canadian Roads.
14.2Engineering References Documents – Lakeshore East Service Group
Toronto On-Street Bikeway Design Guide, DI1.5 - 04/19
City of Toronto, Transportation Services Road Engineering Design Guidelines - 6.0 Curb Radii Guideline, V1.1 - 06/17
Pavement Design and Rehabilitation Guideline, 2e - 2019
City of Toronto, Transportation Services Road Engineering Design Guidelines - 2.0 Lane Widths Guideline, V.2.0.1 - 05/18
City of Toronto Transportation Services Toronto Multi-use Trail Design Guidelines, 01/15
Toronto Complete Streets Guidelines - Street Design for Cycling
City of Toronto Development Infrastructure Policy & Standards for Public Local Residential Streets And Private Streets - 11/05
City of Toronto Multi-Use Path Design Guidelines - 03/07
TRCA Guidelines and Requirements
14.3Engineering References Documents – Barrie Service Group
City of Vaughan Engineering Design Criteria & Standard Drawings
Town of Aurora Design Criteria Manual for Engineering Plans
14.4
14.5Design Approach
In general, the design approach will include the following tasks:
Review all roadway and pedestrian engineering reference documents
Review site specific design criteria
Develop site specific design criteria document based on Table 12-1
Perform site visit and survey
Identify site or design constraints
Develop design alignment and layout
Develop construction and traffic staging plans
Review design and staging with traffic authority
Develop model in BIM
Develop quantity estimate
Develop construction specifications
14.6Design Vehicles
Control vehicles and design vehicles are designated by the Municipalities for the design of intersection layout geometry, applicable sight distances, and roadway horizontal and vertical clearance requirements. 
Detours and access roads will be designed to accommodate vehicles requiring access to each property affected by the Initial Works. 
The design vehicle for each intersection shall accommodate the applicable design vehicle and control vehicle according to:
 location of truck routes and bus routes; and
 type of Emergency Service Provider vehicle and Municipal maintenance vehicle.
14.7Horizontal Alignment
Horizontal alignments shall conform to the General References and specifically the requirements set out in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 of the PA.
Horizontal alignments of roadways not affected by the implementation of the Initial Works do not require modification.
14.8Vertical Alignment
Approval for any planned modifications to the vertical alignment of will be obtained from the Road Authority for any roadway under the jurisdiction of that Road Authority. 
Vertical grades of roadways not affected by the implementation of the Initial Works do not require modification.
14.9Intersections
Intersection lane configurations will match existing conditions except for the intersection layouts described in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 of the PA. 
Intersection layouts will comply with the turning radius requirements of the applicable control vehicle and design vehicle, and applied for each traffic lane and turning movement, subject to the following:
where an at-grade bicycle lane is present, the lane will be considered as available for the turning movement of Road Vehicles; and
left turn lane lengths will be designed to match existing conditions.
Curb radii will be minimized to minimize pedestrian crossing distances.
The Danforth Road at Midland Avenue intersection will be redesigned to eliminate the channelization islands and TTC bus platforms Type “B” as per City Toronto Standard T-310.010-8 will be designed at the northwest, northeast, and southeast corners of the intersection. In addition, the northwest bus shelter will be reinstated, the northeast bus shelter will be relocated 20 meters west and the existing southeast bus shelter will be maintained.
14.10Vehicular Lanes
For roads without specific requirements set out in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 of the PA, pre-existing lane configurations and widths will be retained and restored if the roads are affected by the Initial Works.
Temporary modifications to lane configurations and widths may be made during construction in accordance with Section A.8 of Schedule C-6 of the PA.
Adequate lateral clearances will be provided from road detour barriers to the oncoming active vehicular lane to allow emergency vehicles to safely pass traffic in the case of an emergency.
14.11Site Access
Public access to Municipal Lands, specifically existing parks shall be provided at all times during the Initial Works Period.
As part of the Initial Works, all existing midblock driveways, entrances and laneways will be reinstated, except the “Relocation Entrances” (listed below) which shall be relocated in accordance with the design and Municipal Standards prior to submitting the Consent to Operate System Assurance Submission and the “Permanent Removal Entrances” (listed below) which will be permanently removed. 
Affected property owners and Municipalities will be consulted to ensure that the location and width of the reinstated driveways, entrances or laneways are appropriate for the current and proposed use of the property. 
“Relocation Entrances” are as follows:
Progress Grade Separation at 11 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 31 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 45 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 111 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 55 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 60 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 85 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 65 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 80 Progress Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 77 Progress Ave.
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 63 Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 65 Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 67 Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 93A Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 93B Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 95 Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 95A Galloway Road
Progress Grade Separation at 65 Progress Ave.
“Permanent Removal Entrances” to be permanently removed are as follows:
Denison Grade Separation at 1490 Denison Street
Denison Grade Separation at 1525 Denison Street
Kennedy Grade Separation at 7220 Kennedy Rd.
McNicoll Grade Separation at 2155 McNicoll Ave.
Progress Grade Separation at 1 William Kitchen Rd.
Progress Grade Separation at 34 Progress Ave.
Havendale Pedestrian Grade Separation at 58 Havendale.
Havendale Pedestrian Grade Separation at 56 Havendale.
Havendale Pedestrian Grade Separation at 72 Havendale.
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 85 Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 87 Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 89 Galloway Road
Galloway Road Grade Separation at 91 Galloway Road
McNaughton Road Grade Separation Maple GO Station parking lot egress.
Poplar Road Grade Separation at 79 Poplar Road
14.12Public Boulevards
All localized repairs to any affected road element will comply with City of Toronto Standards. Continuous sidewalks will be provided over the length of the designated limits of work on both sides of any affected roadway.
Existing sidewalks may be retained where possible, and where not otherwise affected by the Initial Works. Sidewalks shall be provided in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS/OPSD. Where new sidewalk is provided, it shall be constructed across driveways and entrances. 
Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be barrier- free. Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be designed to maintain drainage and eliminate water accumulation in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS and/or OPSD.
Sidewalk materials shall be in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS and or OPSD. Sidewalks and secondary pathways will not exceed a grade of 5%. Cross slopes shall be between 2% and 4%. 
14.13Accommodation of Pedestrians and Cyclists
Where access to existing sidewalks, MUP, or bicycle lanes are closed or restricted due to Construction Activities, Barrier-Free, temporary all-weather alternate routes will be maintained for pedestrian and cyclists. All alternative routes to be approved by the relevant Municipality prior to implementation.
Alternative route lengths shall be minimized to avoid excessive detour distances.
All temporary walkways will be continuous, unobstructed temporary pedestrian clearways and connections, with proper construction safety mitigation (i.e. hoarding, etc.), hard surfaced, and AODA compliant with the exception of the Barrie Service Group which does not require a hard surface.
14.14Accommodation of Existing Transit Services
Initial Works shall be designed and constructed in a manner that assists Transit Providers to maintain existing transit headways. This includes maintaining TSP at existing locations if applicable.
A minimum of 80 Business Days’ notice will be provided to a Transit Provider prior to any Construction Activity impacting that Transit Provider’s routes or infrastructure, including Lane Closures affecting bus routes (as noted in Table B.4-1), and relocation of bus stops.
Traffic and transit management will minimize:
travel time variability for transit;
additional transit user travel times;
additional transfers;
additional resources required (buses and kilometres travelled);
disruption to local transit infrastructure (bus stops and shelters);
redundancies;
disruption to other road users; and
additional bus traffic through residential areas.
Public access to all existing bus stops will be maintained at all times. Where this is not feasible temporary bus stop shall be provided as required by Transit Providers and Municipalities.
14.15Street Furniture
All existing Municipal street furniture including bike rings, benches, waste receptacles and other items in the Municipal ROW that are impacted by the Initial Works will be relocated in coordination with the Municipality.
14.16Construction Period Maintenance
The boundaries for maintenance responsibilities during Construction Period within the Municipal ROW will be defined in coordination with the Municipalities.
The following requirements will be met by November 30th of each calendar year of the Initial Works:
base asphalt is completed where started;
maintenance holes and catch basins are flush with base asphalt; and
all temporary line painting is complete.
14.17Construction Staging
Construction staging will be designed with physical separation between the construction zone and the public zone (vehicular, bus, bicycle and pedestrian flows) and incorporate physical protection in areas of intersection.
The exact location and placement of the fencing used to delineate the construction area will be coordinated with the Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
Generators will be contained within noise insulated enclosures to minimize noise from such equipment. 
Noise levels will be kept at or below City’s Noise By-Law requirements outside of the Lands and in accordance with Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations within the Lands, without applicable permits and approvals.
132
Roadway Section
Minimum Lane Requirements During Construction

Notes
Roadway
Location / Intersection
Bus Route
Through Lanes
Exclusive Left Turn Lanes
Exclusive Right Turn Lanes

Thickson Road 
South of Thickson  
Road – Victoria Street East 
Y
One lane NB, one lane SB 
One Lane NB to WB on Victoria St E 
-
Maintain traffic during construction with one lane per direction minimum as per Section B.4.3(a)(iii). 
Danforth Road
Danforth Road and Midland Avenue
Y
Two Lanes EB
One Lane WB
One Lane WB-SB
One Lane WB-NB
Exclusive left WB-SB turn movement can be eliminated based on construction phase requirements
Midland Avenue
Danforth Road and Midland Avenue
Y
Two Lanes NB-SB
One Lane SB to EB
-
-
St. Clair Avenue East
St. Clair Avenue East Bridge Expansion
Y
Two Lanes EB 
Two Lanes WB
-
-
Closure of delineated shoulder lanes to accommodate construction
Denison Street
Clayton Drive – Corvette Road
Y
One Lane EB-WB
One Lane WB to SB on Clayton Drive

One Lane EB to NB on Milliken Meadows Drive
-
-
Kennedy Road
Clayton Drive to Corvette Road
Y
Two Lanes EB-WB
One Lane WB to SB to Pacific Mall
One Lane EB to NB on Corvette Road
One lane WB to NB on Clayton Drive
-
Passmore Avenue
Milliken Boulevard – Silver Star Boulevard
Y
One Lane EB-WB
-
-
-
McNicoll Avenue
Milliken Boulevard to Silver Star Boulevard
Y
Two Lanes EB-WB
One Lane WB to SB on Milliken Boulevard
One Lane EB to NB on Silver Star Boulevard
One Lane WB to NB on Milliken Boulevard
-
Huntingwood Drive
Belgreen Avenue – Kittery Boulevard
Y
One Lane EB-WB
-
-
-

Kittery Boulevard
N
-
-
One Lane NB to EB on Huntingwood Drive
-
Progress Avenue
West of William Kitchen Boulevard – East of West Highland Creek
Y
One Lane EB-WB
-
-
-
McNaughton Road
East of McNaughton Road – Falvo Street
Y
One Lane EB, One Lane WB
-
-
Maintain a detour road throughout construction with a single lane of traffic in each direction on McNaughton Road

14.18Simultaneous Lane Closure Restrictions

Poplar Road and Morningside Avenue shall not have simultaneous lane closures or restrictions for the Initial Works related to the Galloway Road grade separation.
Galloway Road and Morningside Avenue will not have simultaneous lane closures or restrictions for the Initial Works related to the Poplar Road grade separation.
Consumers Drive and Hopkins Street will not have simultaneous lane closures or restrictions for the Initial Works related to the Thickson rail bridge structure.
Midland Avenue and St Clair Road shall not have any simultaneous lane closures or restrictions related to the Scarborough Junction (Danforth) Grade Separation,
Progress Avenue and Ellesmere Road shall not have any simultaneous lane closures or restrictions related to the Progress Avenue Grade Separation.
Midland Avenue and Kennedy Road shall not have any simultaneous lane closures or restrictions related to the Havendale Grade Separation.
Midland Avenue and Kennedy Road shall not have any simultaneous lane closures or restrictions related to the Huntingwood Grade Separation.
14.19Traffic Signals
To be completed later by Traffic Signals
14.20Illumination
To be completed later by Electrical
14.21Site Specific Geometric Design Criteria
14.21.1Lakeshore East – Scarborough Golf Club Grade Separation
No summary table in PA Schedule C-6, Appendix F
14.21.2Lakeshore East - Galloway Road Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway of the Galloway Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-1 – Municipal Roadways – City of Toronto in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
133
Design Parameters
Galloway Road
Road Classification 
Collector 
Design Speed 
50 km/h 
Curb Lane 
3.3 m 
Bike Lanes 
1.8 m (min.) 
Buffer (Road Face of Curb–Retaining Wall) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Buffer (Retaining Wall – Cycle Lane) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Buffer (Retaining Wall – Sidewalk) 
0.3 m (min.) 
Buffer (Cycle Lane – Sidewalk) 
0.2 m (min.) 
Buffer (Retaining Wall – MUP) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Sidewalks 
2.1 m (min.) 
Multi-Use Pathway 
3.5 m (min.) 
Boulevard 
0.5 m (min.) 
Vertical Clearance 
5.3 m (min.) 
Intersections 
Existing lane configurations to be maintained,  
Chantry Court and Westlake Road to be lowered as necessary to tie into grade separated roadway  maintaining all existing accesses 
Min. Grade (road) 
0.5% 
Max. Grade (road) 
6.55% (required) 
Max. Grade (sidewalk) 
5.00% (required) 
Max. Vertical Curve (road) 
Sag Curve (k=9); Crest Curve (k=13) 
Number of Lanes 
(In each direction) 
One curb lane
Sidewalk, cycle lane and MUP 
East Side: MUP 
West Side: Sidewalk and cycle lane 
City of Toronto pedestrian clearway must be adhered to in addition to the minimum dimensions listed. 
Note: Lane widths for City of Toronto measured to face of curb. 
14.21.3Lakeshore East - Poplar Road Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway and multi-use pathway of the Poplar Road Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-7 – Municipal Roadways – City of Toronto in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
134
Design Parameters
Poplar Road - Roadway
Road Classification
Collector
Design Speed
60 km/h
Curb Lane
4.0 m
Turning Circle Radius
12.5m (min.)
Intersections
Existing conditions to be maintained
Min. Grade
0.5%
Number of Lanes (In each direction)
One curb lane
135
Design Parameters
Poplar Road – Multi-use Pathway
Trail Classification
Secondary Trail
Design Speed
20 km/h
Width
3.0 m + 1.0 m (lateral clearance on both sides) = 5.0m
Vertical Clearance
3.0 m (min.)
Curb-side zone
0.9 m
Turning Radius
20 m (min.)
Running Slopes
5% (max.)
Cross Slopes
2% (max.)

14.21.4Lakeshore East – Morningside Avenue Grade Separation
No summary table in PA Schedule C-6, Appendix F
14.21.5Lakeshore East – Thickson Road Grade Separation
No summary table in PA Schedule C-6, Appendix F
14.21.6Barrie – McNaughton Avenue Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway and detour road of the McNaughton Road Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-10 – Municipal Roadways – City of Vaughan in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
136
Design Parameters 
McNaughton Road 
Road Classification 
Collector 
Design Speed 
60 km/h 
Curb Lane 
3.5 m 
Through Lane 
3.3 m 
Multi-use Pathway 
3.0 m 
Buffer (Curb – MUP) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Buffer (MUP – Retaining Wall) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Intersections 
Existing conditions to be maintained 
Min. Grade 
0.5% 
Max. Grade 
5.00% (required) 
Number of Lanes (In each direction) 
One curb lane and, 
One through lane 
137
Design Parameters
McNaughton Road - Detour Road
Road Classification
Collector
Design Speed
40 km/h
Min. Grade
0.5%
Max. Grade
5.0%
Lane Width 
1 x 3.3 m lane in each direction
References - City of Vaughan Engineering Design Criteria & Standard Drawings, 2016 Draft 
14.21.7Stouffville – Scarborough Junction (Kennedy Road) Road Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway of the Scarborough Junction (Kennedy Road) Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-9 – Municipal Roadways – Region of York in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
138
Design Parameters 
Kennedy Road (Three lanes in each direction) 
Road Classification 
Arterial (Regional Road) 
Design Speed 
70 km/h 
Curb Lane (Transit/HOV Lane) 
3.5 m 
Through Lane (2) 
3.3 m 
Left-Turn Lane 
3.0 m 
Bike Lanes 
1.8 m (min.) 
Buffer (Road Back of Curb–Retaining Wall) 
0.5 (min) w/ appropriate protections 
Buffer (Road Face of Curb–Retaining Wall) 
1.2 m (min.) 
Buffer (Retaining Wall – Cycle Lane) 
0.3 m (min.) 
Buffer (Outer Retaining Wall – Sidewalk) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Buffer (Cycle Lane – Sidewalk) 
n/a 
Raised Median 
3.6 m at the structure, 2.0 m outside of structure 
Sidewalks 
1.5 m (min.) 
Boulevard 
0.5 m (min.) 
Vertical Clearance 
5.3 m (min.) 
Intersections 
Existing conditions to be maintained 
Min. Grade (road) 
0.5% 
Max. Grade (road) 
6.00% (required) 
Max. Grade (sidewalk / bike lane) 
5.00% (required) 
Max. Vertical Curve (road) 
Sag Curve (k=10) 
Note: 
1-	Lane widths for Region of York measured to edge of pavement. 
2-	Right-turn-only lanes to be changed to shared right-through lanes at: 
a.Clayton Drive eastbound 
b.Clayton Drive westbound 
c.Goryette Road westbound; 
14.21.8Stouffville –Danforth Road Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway of the Danforth Road Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-3 – Municipal Roadways – City of Toronto in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
139
Design Parameters 
Danforth Road (Two lanes in each direction) 
Road Classification 
Minor Arterial 
Design Vehicle 
MSU* 
Truck Route 
Trucks Allowed 
Bus Route 
TTC Route 16 
Design Speed 
60 km/h 
Through Lane 
3.0 m 
Dedicated Left-Turn Lane 
3.0 m 
Curb Lane 
3.3 m 
Urban Shoulder 
1.7 m (max.) 
Splash Pad (Face of Curb to Sidewalk) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Sidewalk 
2.1 m (min.) 
Buffer (Sidewalk to Parapet Wall) 
0.3 m (min.) 
Raised Median 
1.5 m (per OPSD 504.010) 
Intersection Corner Curb Radius 
As required to accommodate Design Vehicle 
(4.0 m Min.) 
Vertical Clearance 
N/A 

Note: Lane widths for City of Toronto measured to face of curb. 

14.21.9Stouffville – Corvette Avenue Grade Separation
No summary table in PA Schedule C-6, Appendix F

14.21.10Stouffville – Progress Avenue Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway of the Progress Avenue Road Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-2 – Municipal Roadways – City of Toronto in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
1310
Design Parameters 
Progress Avenue (Two lanes in each direction) 
Road Classification 
Minor Arterial 
Design Speed 
60 km/h 
Curb Lane 
3.3 m 
Interior Lane 
3.0 m 
Edge line (Edge of 3.3m lane – Face of curb) 
1.2 m (min) 
Raised Median 
1 m 
Sidewalks 
2.0 m (min.) 
Vertical Clearance 
7.01 m (min.) 
Intersections 
Existing conditions to be maintained 
Min. Grade (road) 
0.5% 
Max. Grade (road) 
5.00% (required) 
Max. Grade (sidewalk / bike lane) 
5.00% (required) 
Max. Vertical Curve (road) 
Crest Curve (k=11) 

Note: Lane widths for City of Toronto measured to face of curb. 
14.21.11Stouffville – Havendale Road Grade Separation
No summary table in PA Schedule C-6, Appendix F
14.21.12Stouffville – Huntingwood Drive Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway of the Progress Avenue Road Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-4 – Municipal Roadways – City of Toronto in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
1311
Design Parameters 
Huntingwood Drive (One lane in each direction) 
Road Classification 
Minor Arterial 
Design Speed 
60 km/h 
Curb Lane 
3.5 m 
Edge line (Edge of 3.5m lane – Face of curb) 
0.5m (min) 
Buffer (Road Face of Curb–Retaining Wall) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Cycle Tracks 
2.0 m (min.) 
Buffer (Retaining Wall – Cycle Lane) 
0.5 m (min.) 
Buffer 
(Outer Retaining Wall – Sidewalk) 
0.3 m (min.) 
Painted Concrete Buffer 
(Cycle Lane – Sidewalk) 
0.8 m (min.) 

Raised Median 
At structure 4 m, Outside Structure 2 m 
Sidewalks 
2.1 m (min.) 
Vertical Clearance 
5.3 m (min.) 
Intersections 
Huntingwood Drive and Bellgreen Avenue to be  
signalized, Huntingwood Drive 	and Kittery Boulevard to be signalized. 
Min. Grade (road) 
0.5% 
Max. Grade (road) 
6.00% (required) 
Max. Grade (bike lanes, sidewalks) 
3% required (up to 5% for profile transition areas limited to 9 meters long) 
Note: Lane widths for City of Toronto measured to face of curb. 
14.21.13Stouffville – McNicoll Avenue Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway of the McNicoll Avenue Road Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-5 – Municipal Roadways – City of Toronto in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
1312
Design Parameters 
McNicoll Avenue (Two lanes in each direction) 
Road Classification 
Minor Arterial 
Design Speed 
60 km/h 
Curb Lane 
3.5 m 
Through Lane 
3.3 m 
Edge line (Edge of 3.5m lane – Face of curb) 
NA 
Buffer (Road Face of Curb–Retaining Wall) 
0.5 m 
Cycle Track (Bi-Directional) 
2.8 m 
Buffer (Retaining Wall – Cycle Lane) 
0.5 m 
Buffer (Retaining Wall – Sidewalk) 
0.2 m 
Buffer (Outer Retaining Wall – Sidewalk) 
0.2 m 
Painted Concrete Buffer (Cycle Lane – Back of Curb) Outside of Structure Elevated Sidewalks 
1.0 m Splash Guard as per CoT T-982.101 to be added  
0.5m from back of curb. 

Mountable   (Cycle  Lane  –  Sidewalk) 
0.15 m horizontal separation with 0.05m vertical separation between cycle lane and sidewalk 
Raised Median 
At Structure 3.6 m Outside Structure 1.2 m 
Sidewalks 
2.1 m (min) 
Vertical Clearance 
5.3 m (min) 
(up to 5% for profile transition areas limited to 9 meters long) 
Max. Grade (bike Lanes, sidewalks) 
3% required 
(up to 5% for profile transition areas limited to 9 meters long) 
Note: Lane widths for City of Toronto measured to face of curb. 
14.21.14Stouffville – Denison Street Grade Separation
Design criteria for the roadway of the Denison Street Road Grade Separation will adhere to Table F-8 – Municipal Roadways – City of Markham in Appendix F of Schedule C-6 in Part C of the PA.
1313
Design Parameters 
Denison Street (Two lanes in each direction) 
Road Classification 
Collector 
Design Speed 
60 km/hr 
Curb Lane 
3.5 m 
Through Lane 
3.3 m 
Edge line (Edge of 3.5m lane – Face of curb) 
NA 
Buffer (Road Face of Curb–Retaining Wall) 
1.2 m 
Cycle Track 
NA 
Concrete Buffer (Outer Retaining Wall – Sidewalk) 
0.5 m 

Concrete Buffer (Back of Curb – Sidewalk) Outside of Structure Elevated Sidewalks 
0.5 m 
Raised Median 
3.6m at the structure, 1.5m outside of structure 
Sidewalks 
2.7 m 
Vertical Clearance 
5.3 m (min) 
Intersections 
Existing conditions to be maintained 
Min. Grade (road) 
0.5% (min) 
Max. Grade (road) 
6.0% (max) 
Max. Grade (cycle track, sidewalks) 
3% required 
(up to 5% for profile transition areas limited to 9 meters long) 
15.Drainage Design Criteria
Per Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures Part 1 clause 4, deck drainage on rail structures shall be provided as follows:
The minimum longitudinal grade of the bridge span shall be 0.5%;
All concrete decks shall have a minimum transverse crossfall of 1%;
Drainage pipes are not allowed to discharge onto bridge seats, roadways, and walkways below;
Horizontal drainage pipes shall be embedded in the ballast adjacent to the concrete and steel curbs, on either side of the track. The drainage pipes shall consist of perforated corrugated galvanized metal pipes surrounded with a geotextile filter material. The pipes shall drain to the abutments and be connected to the vertical drainage system behind the abutment walls. Where there is an approach slab, the pipes shall drain in accordance with Metrolinx standard drawing C15; and,
Prefabricated drainage sheets with geotextile filter material shall be placed against the back face of the abutment stem.
Per CHBDC clause 1.8.2.2, deck drainage on road structures shall be sufficient to ensure that for a 10-year design storm the runoff flowing in the swale or gutter will not encroach more than 1.5 m onto the traffic lane. Bridge deck drainage shall be achieved by providing a minimum 2% transverse crossfall and a minimum longitudinal grade of 0.5%






























Stormwater Pumping Requirements
Performance Requirements
Project Co shall provide a permanent pumping, retention, treatment and discharge of the stormwater for areas that cannot drain by gravity to an existing stormwater system;
The system shall be capable of pumping stormwater up to the allowable release rate of the 100-year flows from the detention tank;
The detention tank shall temporarily store and release flows to ensure the post-development flows do not exceed the current minor system design standard or the overall capacity of the receiving storm sewer;
Project Co shall design the dewatering system in compliance with the requirements of Section 0; and as noted below.
15.1Stormwater Pumping System Technical Requirements
Project Co shall provide the Pumping Stations and Retention Tanks in compliance with the requirements of:
Ontario Ministry of the Environment and Climate Change’s Design Guidelines for Sewage Works - Pumping Stations,
Ontario Water Resources Act,
Ontario MECP EPA Act for Air and Noise.
IV. Ontario Occupational Health and Safety act and related Regulations	
The local Authority Having Jurisdiction.
Ontario Electrical Code, and
local codes of Governmental Authorities.
Project Co shall size pumps and submersible wet well style pumping station with an outdoor enclosed generator and control panel to accommodate the volume of stormwater, as required by the design of stormwater management system.
The pumping stations shall be designed to be unmanned, remotely operated station with weekly service visits.
The number of pumps and individual pump capacities shall be chosen to ensure effective system operation over the expected flows and equipped with the required number of pumps and pump capacities to manage the peak rated flow requirements with the largest pump out of service.
The pumps, detention tank, electrical and instrumentation systems shall be designed to meet the electrical classification as defined in National Fire Protection Association Standard 820 and in Ontario Electrical Safety Code OESC, CEC.
The pumps shall be submersible style sewage pumps in a semi-permanent installation, complete with stainless steel dual guide rail lifting system.
The Pumps shall be capable of passing a 75 mm sphere.
The pumps shall be complete with stainless steel lifting chains, portable davit crane and fixed davit base over top of the pump hatch.
The roof of the detention tank shall be full enclosed and complete with lockable suitable sized for removal of the pumps, aluminum hatches.
The wet well shall be designed to meet the requirements in the Hydraulic Institute Standards for wet well design and dimensions.
The pumps shall have leak and temperature alarms integrated into the control panel and pumping station alarm and control system.
The pumps shall have variable frequency drives and controls to be capable of operating over the range of expected flows and ensuring that the pump cycling shall be limited to no more than six starts per hour per pump and in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
The main process piping where not buried shall be SS316L piping to ANSI B31.3 requirements.
Each pump installed with discharge isolation gate or plug valve, check valve and air release valves if required to remove air from high spots in the force main.
All water process equipment must meet AWWA and ANSI Standards.
All equipment to be installed with a SCADA based control and monitoring system and interface that complies with the Operating Authorities Standards (City of Markham, City of Toronto, or Region of York, depending on the location of the underpass); to enable fully remote operations and monitoring from the respective Main Control Centre. Project Co will be responsible for integrating the pumping station into the respective Main Control System.
A remote backup cellular based auto dialer system shall be provided for alarm notification.
The controls shall provide monitoring as a minimum for station flow, pump run times and retention tank level over time.
There shall be a minimum of one magnetic type flow meter at each station, installed to allow for easy maintenance and calibration.
The submersible wet well style pumping station shall include primary ultrasonic or radar pump controls, complete with backup floats.
The submersible wet well style pumping station shall be complete with a high and low water level float alarms.
The pump controls and VFDs shall be housed in a suitable weather protected enclosure.
The PLC and control system shall include a battery backup UPS for a minimum of a 1-hour power outage.
Provide a CCTV system tied to the PLC and remote communication system to provide remote visual monitoring of the submersible wet well style pumping station during day and night and integrated into the main central control system.
The submersible wet well style pumping station shall include a standby rated, backup generator and automatic transfer switch installed in a weatherproof sound attenuated enclosure.
The sound enclosure rating of the generator set shall be the lessor of 85 dBA at 1 m or that required to meet the MECP noise criteria.
The standby power system shall include sufficient controls and alarms connected to the SCADA system to identify when the station is operating on backup power and to transmit generator alarms.
The standby generator shall have a double walled base mounted fuel tank with fuel storage capable of operating the generator for a minimum of 24 hours.




15.2Stormwater Detention Tanks
All depressed municipal roadway drainage that is not conveyed via gravity toward an existing municipal storm sewer outlet shall be conveyed toward a single underground concrete stormwater detention tank located within the municipal right-of-way corridor but outside of any vehicular travel lanes.
Stormwater detention tanks shall be sized with the capacity to capture, temporarily detain and mechanically convey flows at the allowable release rate of the receiving system, for events up to and including the 100-year storm;
Shall be designed with the ability to completely dewater accumulated stormwater following wet weather events, within not more than 24 hours;
The stormwater detention tank shall be hydraulically designed to provide self-scouring capability to prevent sediment accumulation.
An additional 10% tank capacity shall be provided beyond the minimum hydraulic detention volume calculated to temporarily detain and convey the 100-year storm.
A minimum of two access maintenance holes shall be provided. One of the access maintenance holes shall have a minimum size to accommodate equipment with a minimum opening of 1200 mm x 1200 mm. The larger access hatch shall include mechanical lifting points to facilitate maintenance access;
Portable lifting davit bases shall be installed beside each hatch and each hatch shall be lockable and complete with fall arrest grating on the interior.
Detention tank shall be sloped to a common sump which shall have a cleaning hatch located above it to facilitate periodic cleaning of the detention tank.
The detention tank shall be completed with fixed ladders below the access hatches and include fall arrest system.
The detention tank shall be complete with properly sized vents, with each vent terminating in a downward elbow and bird screen.
The minimum height for the tank(s) and any access passages from maintenance holes shall be 2.4 meters to facilitate future access by inspection staff and/or maintenance work by crews (including equipment); and
The tank(s) shall be designed to prohibit any groundwater infiltration directly or indirectly into the tank from any source including perforated subdrains, joints in the tank, tank base slab buoyancy load reduction strategies, or infiltration from storm sewers joints exceeding MECP and OPSS leakage guidelines.
Regardless of the water quality treatment requirements, any proposed stormwater detention tank must include an oil-grit separator (OGS) immediately upstream to enable sediment removal from all flows that contribute drainage toward the depressed municipal underpass corridor. OGS unit shall be sized to achieve a minimum 50% long-term average Total Suspended Solids (TSS) removal from the contributing drainage area. OGS unit shall also be sized to ensure 100% removal of 1.5” particle size diameter for all events up to and including the 100-year storm; and
Project Co shall provide an Operation & Maintenance Manual to outline the long-term maintenance requirements for the OGS unit.
15.3Site Specific Requirements
As per Schedule C-6 of the PA, item H (i), Project Co shall provide at the Scarborough Junction a sanitary sewer pumping station in compliance with the drainage requirements defined in Section B.4.1 and Section B.4.2.
The following design standards, guidelines, and specifications are followed or referred to where applicable: 
[Metrolinx Asset Protection Package (MAPP) obligations]

16.Geo-engineering Design Criteria










17.Utilities Design Criteria
Design criteria Water, Sewerage, Waste Water, etc..]  will be specified separately in the Utilities Design Basis / Design Criteria in accordance with the Project Agreement and any construction work package constraints.
18.Track Design Criteria
Design criteria Track]  will be specified separately in the Track Design Basis / Design Criteria in accordance with the Project Agreement and any construction work package constraints.
19.Mechanical Design Criteria
20.Electrical Power Design Criteria
20.1Reference Codes, Standards and Guidelines
All work shall be carried out to comply with the requirements of the statutory authorities having jurisdiction of the site. These requirements shall include, but not be limited to the following:
Local (city/town/municipal) regulations.
Provincial regulations.
Electrical Safety Authority (ESA);
Canadian Standards Association (CSA);
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA);
The design shall be in accordance with the latest editions of the applicable codes, standards, guides or organizations as follows:
C6 Project Agreement
Metrolinx Design Requirements Manual
Ontario Building Code (OBC)
Ontario Electrical Safety Code (OESC)
Canadian Standards Association (CSA)
20.2Electrical Design Philosophy
The electrical design shall be based on providing the following features at the most economical cost, considering both investment and operating expenditures:
Safety to personnel during operation and maintenance.
Ease of maintenance for equipment maintained by non-specialized personnel.
Flexibility and reliability of electrical services.
Energy conservation with respect to system and equipment and their operation.
Proper coordination for all elements of the system as to:
Arc-Flash levels;
Insulation levels;
Interrupting capacities;
Protective relaying;
Mechanical strength
20.3Power Distribution
The Electrical power source will be evaluated for each site. The source could  feeds from Metrolinx facilities or feeds from hydro utilities. EJV will co-ordinate with the respective source owner to co-ordinate a feed to the grade separation. Where required applications for service will be completed by CJV.
Each site will include electrical power panels, these will be located within available building(s) or as external equipment, to be evaluated for each site.
Backup power in the form of a generator or UPS is not provided, per Metrolinx standards.
21.Electrical Grounding and Bonding Design Criteria
The grounding and bonding design criteria is defined within the project-wide Basis of Design - Electrical Grounding and Bonding (Document No. RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00014), currently under development and provided under separate cover. This document will include the design principles and assumptions to be implemented for each of the structures.
A fully coordinated and integrated grounding and bonding system in accordance with the C6 PA will be provided within each the structure:
To ensure the electrical safety of all rail system personnel, passengers, and the general public
To safeguard the integrity of rail operations and maintenance requirements by minimizing the risk of electrical hazards. 
To protect equipment, cabling, buildings, and structures from electrical hazards through a well-designed and properly implemented grounding and bonding system. 
To ensure compliance with relevant industry standards and regulations for grounding and bonding systems in rail transportation.
The grounding and bonding system provided as part of this project will accommodate for the future electrification of the overhead line system requirements. 
22.
23.Architectural Design Criteria
23.1Vision
As we look to our future of transportation in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area (GTHA), we recognize the pressing matter in need for transit infrastructure projects to accommodate the needs, and cultural changes of a growing and diversifying population.  
With the same importance we recognize the importance of sustainability, accessibility, and universal design, and are dedicated in making environmentally and human-centric conscious design choices to eliminate carbon emissions, waste, and the segregation of people.  By prioritizing both the needs of the users and the environment, we aim to create a transportation network to which is sustainable, comfortable, safe and accessibility for our growing population.  
23.2Reference Standards
The following criteria, design standards, codes, specifications, and best practices will be used for all architectural project works include, but limited to:
AODA (Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities).
CSA B651 – Accessible Design for the Built Environment Standard.
CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design) Best Practices.
Metrolinx GO Design Requirements Manual.
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DS-01 – Transit Oriented Communities.
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DS-02 – Universal Design Standard.
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DS-03 – Wayfinding Design Standard.
Metrolinx Go Design Standards – DS04 – GO Station Architecture Design Standard.
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DS-05 – Sustainable Design Standard.
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DGL-03 – Graffiti Management.
TAC Guidelines for Understanding use and Implementation of Accessible Pedestrian Signals.
TADG (Toronto Accessibility Design Guidelines).
TGS (Toronto Green Standards).
23.3Design Requirements
To achieve our vision aspirations the architectural program-wide approach is to cooperative between all Consultants and Subject Matter Experts (SME) to carefully implement subject specific design requirements, establishing the vision be attainable. The following sub-sections will outline further implementation strategy for each design principle and standard that will guide the design work.
The project-wide architectural design will reflect the Project Agreement and compliance including but not limited to the codes, standards, and regulations mentioned in this Section.  In any case in which standards are conflicting, the stricter measure will be considered.  
The guiding principles outlined within the strategy is in alignment with the City’s Official Plan (2015) policies which focuses on creating a walkable Toronto and highlights the importance of pedestrian activity as a part of a vibrant city. They include the following:
Universal Accessibility, which states that all private places and spaces should be barrier-free. 
Safety, which states that the safety of the pedestrians takes precedence over all other modes of transportation. 
Design Excellence, which states that high-quality design creates a positive experience for everyone. 
23.4Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design, widely known as CPTED is a multi-disciplinary approach of crime prevention that uses urban and architectural design, and the management of built and natural environments. CPTED strategies aim to reduce crime by manipulating the physical environment for the purpose of influencing certain desired human behavior, resulting in reduced criminal behavior. CPTED is a strategy that recognizes the relationship that exists between the built environment and incidence of crime.  
In open public spaces such as a metro or train stations, crime and the perception of personal safety are key considerations that directly influence customer experience, function, and ridership numbers. Proper design and effective use of the built environment can lead to a reduction in the incidence and fear of crime by deterring criminal behavior. These behavioral effects can be accomplished by manipulating the physical environment to eliminate areas that could have the possibility to support criminal behavior.
For CPTED to be successful, the designer must be able to anticipate, recognize and appraise risks of crime to initiate control or actions to remove or reduce these risks. There are three main concepts of CPTED: natural surveillance, natural access control and territorial reinforcement. Natural surveillance and access control strategies limit the opportunity for crime and territorial reinforcement promotes social control through a variety of measures.
23.4.1Natural Surveillance
Natural surveillance involves the design and placement of physical features, activities, and people to increase the perceived risk of attempting criminal activity by improving visibility of potential offenders to the public. This allows for fostering positive social interaction among users of private/public space and helps promote casual observation which increases a sense of defensible space that discourages undesirable activity. The design should allow for natural observation from the street to the station, from station to the street and between uses. 
23.4.2Natural Access Control
Natural access control aims to limit the opportunity for crime by decreasing access opportunities through use of physical and symbolic barriers. These barriers can attract, channel, and control the movement of people and allow for more controlled surveillance to minimize opportunity for crime. Access barriers can be placed through use of landforms, pathways, and landscaping. Some of the more direct forms are fences, gates, bollards, and camera surveillance. 
23.4.3Territorial Reinforcement
Territorial reinforcement aims to promote social control through defined types of spaces to promote sense of ownership. Taking measures to apply this concept allows the normal user to feel safe and make the potential offender to stand out and easier to identify. This can be achieved through use of building design, unique paving and surfaces, screening, signage, and landscape. It is considered that design of an area is far better communicator than just signage. 
23.5Accessibility and Universal Design
Accessibility in the architectural scope will consider a multitude of items in which will enhance the use experience in attempt to create a safe, reliable, and comfortable environment.  Coordination between the interior and exterior building environment will therefore be critical in achieving a fully accessible building environment.  
Program wide, all occupied and staffed areas will meet the standards and guidelines of the Ontario Building Code (OBC), CSA Group for Accessible Design for the Build Environment (CSA B651), Metrolinx Universal Design Standard 2 (DS-02), Go Design Requirements Manual (DRM), City of Toronto Accessibility Guidelines (CoTADG) and Accessibility of Ontarians with Disabilities Act (AODA).  Where there are conflicts, the stricter requirement will take priority.
The Accessibility Design Guidelines, based on the current Canadian federal and provincial legislation and published standards, consolidate the ‘best practices’ identified during extensive research and consultation on existing barrier-free standards and guidelines. The Accessibility Design Guidelines state that all accessible design must follow the following principles and objectives: 
Make approaching, entering and using buildings and structures easier. In this respect, accessible design must address a wide variety of internal and external building elements; 
Provide an equivalent level of life safety for everyone, including methods of leaving a building and communicating an emergency; 
Emphasize dignity and independence, providing those features that will allow people to function in their day-to-day activities; 
23.6Urban Planning Design Criteria
The urban planning team does not provide any design services. The urban planning services relate primarily to due diligence. This includes reviewing and providing information on policy applicable to the site, such as: Official Plans, Secondary Plans, Zoning Reviews and Urban Design guidelines. It also involves either leading or supporting any required Planning Act applications (site plan application, minor variance, rezoning, etc.). 
23.7Code Compliance 
The requirements in the OBC relative to fire protection, occupant safety and accessibility will be reviewed as part of the Code compliance scope of work. The submission requirements in PA Schedule C-6 C-1.1 (d) and (e) will be addressed, which include (but not limited to) the Occupant load for egress calculations; Egress location and capacity; and Barrier-free design requirements.
A preliminary code compliance assessment is conducted to review the applicable fire protection and life safety design requirements and identify alternative means for compliance where required.
The code compliance assessment for all existing stations is conducted based on the 2012 Ontario Building Code (OBC, O.Reg. 332/12 as amended to O.Reg. 451/22), as the locally applicable Code. Project Agreement (PA) Schedule C-6, 2021 is reviewed for Project specific requirements.

23.8Construction Materials
The DRM and DS-04 have requirements for pedestrian tunnels cladding in the condition between station buildings platforms. There is a Metrolinx standard that address the cladding finishes for a pedestrian tunnel. We propose the following materials to be used in the grade separation facilities of the ONcorridor Project:
23.8.1Pedestrian Bridges Cladding
The cladding for any required enclosure of bridge structure shall be composed of mostly transparent material in all public accessible areas. 
Canopy roofs will be designed for adequate wind uplift forces, snow loads, and ice/water loads. Roofs shall prevent water from ponding, ice damming, and snow and ice accumulation. Fall protection anchor systems shall be provided, where required. Roofs shall be composed of single white PVC roofing membrane on tapered/untampered polyisocyanurate rigid insulation to form the minimum slopes for drainage, polyethylene vapor barrier on structural steel deck.
The type of drainage system for the roof will be determined from the storm water management report at each station. 
Soffits and fasciae will also be modular pre-finished composite metal panels, providing the ability to access the concealed services and permit easy replacement as required.
23.8.2Pedestrian Bridges Flooring
Exposed concrete floors shall be coated with a penetrating linseed oil-based sealer or a clear penetrating monomeric sealer that forms a water repelling layer on and in the concrete surface to resist chloride penetration and prevent dusting.
Finished flooring shall have a surface that is smooth, even, and free from roughness or open defects with a non-slip finish surface. 
23.8.3Pedestrian Bridges Ceilings
Ceilings for any required bridges enclosures/ canopies will be a metal panel ceiling system integrating lighting and communications equipment, suspended, allowing conduit and raceways to run above the ceiling. 
23.8.4Pedestrian Tunnels Cladding
Walls of tunnels shall be exposed concrete with hinged or removable stainless-steel covers for services corridors on both sides of tunnels. Tunnel gutters to be completed with stainless steel grilles. All interior finishes will be selected for safety, sustainability, durability, and performance—with maintainability and repairability as the key element for selection.
23.8.5Pedestrian Tunnels Flooring
Exposed concrete floors shall be coated with a penetrating linseed oil-based sealer or a clear penetrating monomeric sealer that forms a water repelling layer on and in the concrete surface to resist chloride penetration and prevent dusting.
Finished flooring shall have a surface that is smooth, even, and free from roughness or open defects with a non-slip finish surface. 
23.8.6Pedestrian Tunnels Ceilings
Ceilings finish for the tunnel areas will be exposed concrete.
23.9

23.10Heritage Design Criteria
All relevant Cultural Heritage background documentation was reviewed to determine the required heritage design criteria and determine if additional studies are required based on the proposed scope of work and footprint for the Project outlined above and identified in Figure 1-1. These Cultural Heritage studies are required to ensure regulatory compliance and to meet Metrolinx corporate due diligence requirements.
The following table (Error! Reference source not found.) presents a summary of required follow-on Cultural Heritage studies and, if applicable, the heritage design criteria.

Table 22-1: Results of Previous Cultural Heritage Reporting and Heritage Design Criteria
Location
Previous Reporting
Results / Required Follow-on Cultural Heritage Work
Heritage Design Criteria
Lakeshore East Kingston
Birchmount Road Bridge Project (LSE 11+800)
GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP Final CHSR, ASI 2016
Cultural Heritage Screening Report for Built Heritage Resources and Cultural Heritage Landscapes – Lakeshore East Metrolinx Corridor Expansion (CHSR) prepared by AECOM in June 2016
Cultural Heritage Evaluation Report (CHER): Birchmount Road Overpass, Lakeshore East, Mile 326.50, Toronto, Ontario
Cultural Heritage Evaluation Recommendation Report: Birchmount Road Overpass, Lakeshore East, Mile 326.50, Toronto, Ontario
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Scarborough Golf Club Road Grade Separation (LSE 19+100)
Cultural Heritage Screening Report – Cultural Heritage Landscapes and Built Heritage Resources. Lakeshore East Rail Corridor Expansion (Guildwood to Pickering) (UMA, 2016)
CHER required for Golf Club Road (PIN: 063760422)
(with possible follow-on HIA)
To be determined

Cultural Heritage Screening Report – Cultural Heritage Landscapes and Built Heritage Resources. Lakeshore East Rail Corridor Expansion (Guildwood to Pickering) (UMA, 2016)
Scarboro Golf & Country Club Clubhouse, 321 Scarborough Golf Club Road Cultural Heritage Evaluation Report Parts 1 and 2 (ERA, 2018) *
Preliminary Heritage Impact Assessment: Scarboro Golf & Country Club Clubhouse, 321 Scarborough Golf Club Road Cultural Heritage Evaluation Report Parts 1 and 2 (ERA, 2018) **
CHER required for Scarborough Golf Club (PIN: 063760513, 064760142)
(with possible follow-on HIA)
To be determined
Galloway Road Grade Separation (LSE 20+750)
Cultural Heritage Screening Report – Cultural Heritage Landscapes and Built Heritage Resources. Lakeshore East Rail Corridor Expansion (Guildwood to Pickering) (UMA, 2016)
CHER required for Galloway Road (PIN 06383-0468)
To be determined
Poplar Road Grade Separation (LSE 21+161)
Cultural Heritage Screening Report – Cultural Heritage Landscapes and Built Heritage Resources. Lakeshore East Rail Corridor Expansion (Guildwood to Pickering) (UMA, 2016)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Morningside Avenue Grade Separation (LSE 21+600)
Cultural Heritage Screening Report – Cultural Heritage Landscapes and Built Heritage Resources. Lakeshore East Rail Corridor Expansion (Guildwood to Pickering) (UMA, 2016)
CHER required for Morningside Avenue (Part of PIN 06390-0478 and 065220328)
To be determined

Cultural Heritage Screening Report – Cultural Heritage Landscapes and Built Heritage Resources. Lakeshore East Rail Corridor Expansion (Guildwood to Pickering) (UMA, 2016)
GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP (ASI, 2017)
Cultural Heritage Evaluation Report; 90 Morningside Avenue, Scarborough, Ontario (AECOM, 2016)
Heritage Impact Assessment: 90 Morningside Avenue, Scarborough (ERA, 2017) ***
HIA for 90 Morningside Avenue (PIN: 063840299)
To be determined
Highland Creek Rail Bridge Expansion (LSE 24+760)

Cultural Heritage Screening Report – Cultural Heritage Landscapes and Built Heritage Resources. Lakeshore East Rail Corridor Expansion (Guildwood to Pickering) (UMA, 2016)
GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP (ASI, 2017)
Cultural Heritage Evaluation Report, Parts I and II, Highland Creek Bridge Kingston Subdivision, Mile 318.50, City of Toronto, Ontario (UMA, 2014)
Heritage Impact Assessment: Highland Creek Bridge, Kingston Subdivision, Mile 318.50, Toronto, Ontario (AECOM, 2016)
Confirm design hasn’t changed since 2016 HIA was complete. Update HIA if necessary
Complete a Strategic Conservation Plan (SCP)
The HIA (AECOM, 2016) makes the following recommendations:
In order to mitigate the loss of the cut stone materials on the north and south side of pier and abutments, Metrolinx should consider using a concrete finish on the exterior faces of the pier and abutments that are sympathetic with the historic stone material of the existing bridge. The exterior concrete should be designed to match the existing coursing and volume of the rock-face ashlar stone that will no longer be visible;
In order to mitigate the loss of the views of the historic deck plate structures from the north and south sides of the bridge the new structures should be designed in a manner consistent with the historic designs and appearance; and
To mitigate the anticipated loss of the walkways on the north and south sides of the existing tracks, new walkways should be installed on either side of the additional tracks.
Thickson Road Bridge Expansion (LSE 48+310)
GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP (ASI, 2017)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Barrie - Newmarket
McNaughton Road Grade Separation (BAR 29+755)
GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP EPR (Morrison Hershfield, Gannett Fleming, 2017)
GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP Errata to the EPR (Morrison Hershfield, Gannett Fleming, 2017)  
Stouffville Rail Corridor Grade Separations Project: Cultural Heritage Report: Existing Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment (Stantec, 2021)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Tannery Creek Culvert Expansion (BAR 50+800)
Cultural Heritage Screening Report, Metrolinx Barrie Rail Corridor Expansion, Newmarket Subdivision Mile 3.00 to Mile 63.00, Transit Project Assessment Process (ASI, 2017) 
2017 GO Transit Rail Network Electrification EA Stage 1 Archaeological Assessment Report Rev. No.1 (ASI, 2017)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Stouffville - Uxbridge
Scarborough Junction and Danforth Road Grade Separation (STO 14+657)
Scarborough Junction Grade Separation Project; Cultural Heritage Report: Existing Conditions and Preliminary Impact assessment (Stantec, 2021)
Cultural Heritage Screening Report: Danforth Road (Stantec, 2017)
A total of four built heritage resources were identified within 50m of the project which require the implementation of a detailed Construction Management Plan: 
87 Granger Avenue
112 Granger Avenue
70 Granger Avenue
1 Granger Avenue 
23 Laurel Avenue
Staging and laydown areas should avoid impacts to these resources and additional stabilization measures may be required based on project vicinity.
Not applicable
Corvette Avenue Grade Separation (STO 15+60)
GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP Final CHSR (ASI 2016)
Cultural Heritage Assessment Report, Exiting Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment, MX Stouffville Rail Corridor Expansion, Class EA (ASI, 2014)
Three Conditional Heritage Properties requiring CHERs (ASI, 2016):
CHL-8 (Corvette Park, PIN: 064370259)
720 Midland Avenue (PIN: 06494-0109)
Six Conditional Heritage Properties requiring CHERs (Stantec, 2017):
786 Danforth Road (PIN: 064350228)
800 Danforth Road (PIN: 064350246)
112 Granger Avenue (PIN: 064940062)
To be determined
Progress Avenue Grade Separation (STO 20+233)
Stouffville Rail Corridor Grade Separations Project: Cultural Heritage Report: Existing Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment (Stantec, 2021)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Havendale Road Grade Separation (STO 22+748)
Cultural Heritage Assessment Report, Exiting Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment, MX Stouffville Rail Corridor Expansion, Class EA (ASI, 2014)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Huntingwood Drive Grade Separation (STO 23+201)
Cultural Heritage Assessment Report, Exiting Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment, MX Stouffville Rail Corridor Expansion, Class EA (ASI, 2014)
Stouffville Rail Corridor Grade Separations Project: Cultural Heritage Report: Existing Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment (Stantec, 2021)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required
Not applicable
McNicoll Avenue Grade Separation (STO 25+238)
Cultural Heritage Assessment Report, Exiting Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment, MX Stouffville Rail Corridor Expansion, Class EA (ASI, 2014)
Cultural Heritage Screening Report: McNicoll Avenue Stouffville Rail Corridor Grade Separation Program RQQ-2014-C1-092 (Stantec, 2017)
Stouffville Rail Corridor Grade Separations Project: Cultural Heritage Report: Existing Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment (Stantec, 2021)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Denison Street Grade Separation (STO 27+887)
Cultural Heritage Assessment Report, Exiting Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment, MX Stouffville Rail Corridor Expansion, Class EA (ASI, 2014)
Cultural Heritage Screening Report Denison Street Stouffville Rail Corridor Grade Separation Program RQQ-2014-C1-092 Stantec May 12, 2017
Stouffville Rail Corridor Grade Separations Project: Cultural Heritage Report: Existing Conditions and Preliminary Impact Assessment (Stantec, 2021)
Previously assessed, no further heritage reporting required 
Not applicable
Kitchener - Weston/Guelph
Islington Avenue Bridge Modifications (KIT 16+750)
GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP Final CHSR (ASI 2016)
Cultural Heritage Evaluation Report: Islington Avenue Bridge, Mile 7.46, Lakeshore West Rail Corridor – GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP, City of Toronto (ASI 2016)
Cultural Heritage Evaluation Recommendation Report: Islington Avenue Bridge, Mile 7.46, Lakeshore West Rail Corridor – GO Rail Network Electrification TPAP, City of Toronto (ASI 2016)
Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA): Islington Avenue Bridge, Mile 7.46, Lakeshore West Corridor - Rev. No.1 (ASI 2017)
HIA and SCP required
To be determined
Pearson Airport Rail Link Spur Bridge Modification	
UP Electrification EA Cultural Heritage Assessment Report – Final (Morrison-Hershfield, 2014)
CHER required
To be determined 
*CHER was only completed on the clubhouse, not the entire property as required under O. Reg. 569/22. 
**HIA was completed for Metrolinx to accommodate a new road allowance and does not assess impacts for the grade separation.
***Impacts from the grade separation project were not assessed in the 2017 HIA.
****HIA was completed for OCS upgrades, not construction of the retaining wall.

24.Landscape Architecture Design Criteria
The Urban realm and landscape design will align with the vision of the project and specifically achieve the design vision, principles and design requirements listed in the Landscape Architectural Design Vision Report: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-LND-DES-RPT-0000. The landscape design for grade separations will meet Project Agreement goals.
Site furnishings, if present, shall be as identified in GO DRM 2020, or shall follow local Municipal standards. All site furnishings shall be located adjacent to sidewalks, or other public rights-of-way. All fencing requirements shall strictly adhere to GO DRM 2020, and local Municipal standards.
All planting shall enhance natural areas adjacent to the site. Planting shall be specified in accordance with Canadian Standards for Nursery, relevant municipal standard details, and requirements, and Metrolinx standard details, and GO DRM as applicable. 
All tree protection and replacement requirements not within the Metrolinx Right-of-Way shall adhere to the applicable municipal details, requirements, and by-laws. All tree replacements within the Metrolinx Right-of-Way shall follow Metrolinx Vegetation Management Guidelines.
24.1Landscape Project Design Requirements

The Project specific requirements in addition to the referenced codes are: 
Project Agreement Schedule C-2, Appendix C 
Project Agreement Schedule C-6, 2021 
Project Agreement Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations 
Project Agreement Schedule C-6 – Appendix D – Output Specifications:  Aesthetics Requirements for Electric Traction Infrastructure 
Where conflicts exist between the requirements of the above and the Ontario Building Code, the most stringent requirements shall apply. If there is a conflict, an alternative solution will be required to document the rationale for non-compliance. 
24.2Reference Standards
The following criteria, design standards, codes, specifications, and best practices will be used for all project works, included but not limited to and listed in alphabetical order: 
AODA (Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities)  
Applicable Municipal, Conservation Authorities, and/or other Authorities with Jurisdiction Operation Policies, Procedures, Standards and Guidelines 
Applicable Conservation Operation Policies, Procedures, Standards and Guidelines 
Canadian Landscape Standards and Nursery Sod Growers Association of Ontario 
Canadian Standards for Nursery Stock 
City of Toronto Construction Specifications, Drawings and Details 
CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design) best practices  
Metrolinx GO Design Requirements Manual 
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DS-02 – FEA-001 Detectable Tile Installation Update 
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DS-05 – Sustainable Design Standard 
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DS-07 – Bike Infrastructure Design Standards 
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DS-08 – GO Bus Park & Ride Design Standard_210326 
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DGL-02 – Vegetative Screening 
Metrolinx GO Design Standards – DGL-03 – Graffiti Management 
OPSS (Ontario Provincial Standard Specification) and OPSD (Ontario Provincial Standard Drawing) 
OTM (Books 1 through 12 and 18) 
TAC Guidelines for Understanding Use and Implementation of Accessible Pedestrian Signals 
TADG (Toronto Accessibility Design Guidelines) 
TGS (Toronto Green Standards) 
25.Traffic Design Criteria
25.1Transportation Impact Study
Traffic impact studies (TIS) will be conducted for each grade separation and bridge modification to determine the impacts on the surrounding transportation network. The level of assessment will vary by site, reflective of the permanent changes to traffic arrangements (if any) and the scale of construction activity. This will include determining if it will be possible to maintain access during construction activities. If not, an alternate route will be determined that considers the access needs of vehicles, cyclists, pedestrians, workers and construction equipment. Where grade separations / bridge modifications are in proximity to one another and where practicable based on construction staging and road network layout, multiple locations may be combined into one TIS. The purpose of these analyses will be:
To assess the impacts of the final permanent arrangement (where this differs materially from the current arrangement) on the operations of the municipal transportation network, including the municipal road network, transit network and active transportation facilities.  
To assess the impacts of construction on the operations of the municipal transportation network, including the municipal road network, transit network and active transportation facilities.  
To determine measures to mitigate permanent and temporary impacts to the transportation network including development of traffic control plans, transit management plans and active modes accommodation plans. 
Each TIS will be carried out in accordance with the appropriate jurisdictions guidelines as relevant to site locations (i.e., City of Toronto, City of Markham, York Region, City of Vaughan) as well as OTM Book 7 – Temporary Conditions. Traffic analysis will be conducted using Synchro Studio 11 to determine level-of-service (LOS), volume-to-capacity ratios and vehicle queue lengths. Appropriate methodologies for determining Active Transportation and Transit LOS will also be applied based on the jurisdictional requirements of the grade crossing.
25.2Initial Works Traffic Management Plan, Transit Management Plan and Traffic Control Plan
Each grade crossing location will also require an Initial Works Traffic Management Plan, Transit Management Plan and Traffic Control Plan (IWTM). The IWTM will include the following information:
The location and size of the work zone.
The duration and closure times for any lane closures or other lane adjustments.
Identification of impacts to the capacity of the transportation network as a result of construction activities.
Identification of transit impacts including:
Affected transit routes, including transit staging; and
Affected bus stops and location of temporary bus stops.
Identification of impacts to vehicular travel lanes, bicycle lanes, multi-use pathways and sidewalks.
Identification of impacts to commercial properties, residential properties and parking facilities.
Determination of lane configuration (i.e., lane designations, lane widths, length of turning bays, etc.) during construction.
Determination of work zone speed limit reductions.
Identification of lanes with restricted widths.
Placement of all traffic control devices, traffic control persons, temporary signage, pavement markings, barriers and protective works.
Placement and messages on all portable variable message signs.
Identification of the location of hazards created by road geometry or local geography.
Identification of detour routes, lane shifts or diversions and justification for the proposed detour routes and diversions based on the findings of the TIS.
Determination of the design speed and design vehicle for each detour route, lane shift and diversion.
Required traffic signal timing modifications.
Identification of impacts to on-street parking.
Identification of impacts to street lighting.
Identification of areas of excavation that are near vehicular travel lanes or active modes facilities and the proposed safety measures.
Any other information that is necessary to assist in describing the planned traffic, pedestrian and transit accommodation measures.
26.Cable Containment Design Criteria
The basis of Design for Cable Containment on Structures is covered in the document titled Basis of Design - Corridors - Cable Containment (Document No. RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00007) and is a part of the Corridor Package covering Cable Containment.
27.
 STYLEREF 1 \s 
261

































Reference Program Documentation
Table 26-2: Reference Program Documents
Document No.
Document Name
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00008
Basis of Design – Corridors – Civil Infrastructure Line Works
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00007
Basis of Design – Corridors – Cable Containment
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00010
Basis of Design – Corridors – Trackwork and Track Alignment
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00014
Basis of Design – Electrical Grounding & Bonding

Basis of Design – Environmental

Basis of Design – Geo-engineering
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00006
Basis of Design – New Stations
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00002
Basis of Design – Rail Facilities
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00003
Basis of Design – Renovation Stations
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00004
Basis of Design – Traction Power Facilities
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00005
Basis of Design – Union Station
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00011
Basis of Design – Utilities
RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-EGM-RPT-00007
Basis of Design – Corridors – Cable Containment
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-ART-DES-RPT-00002.docx
Architectural Design Vision Report:
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-LND-DES-RPT-00001.docx
Landscape Architectural Design Vision Report:



Appendix A
Pursuit Phase Preliminary Drawings



A.1

A.1.1

A.1.1.1

