Basis of Design – Corridors - Trackwork and Track Alignment
Design Criteria














04/11/2023
D01.03
DDD Interdisciplinary Review
J. Talic
F. van Biljon
J. Malik
R. Orsi
Date
Rev.
Status
Prepared By
Checked By
Reviewed By
Approved By
MM/DD/YYYY



DISCLAIMER
© 2022. This document has been produced and distributed for members of ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP’s purposes in respect of the GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor (RER Package 3) project only. No part of this document may be reproduced, published, converted, or stored in any data retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the Designers, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING. This document must not be used by the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP (or any of its constituent members) for any other purpose, or provided to, relied upon or used by any other person without ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING’s prior written consent.
All Confidential Information shall remain the sole property of the applicable Sponsor or the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP or ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING and each party shall treat it as confidential. Confidential Information shall not be used by for any purpose other than for performing their respective duties on the GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor (RER Package 3) Project.
This report contains the expression of the opinion of, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING using its professional judgment and reasonable care based on information available and conditions existing at the time of preparation. The use of, or reliance upon this report is subject to the relevant Design Services Agreement between ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING and the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP (the “DSA”) and the following:
This report is to be read in the context of and subject to the terms of the DSA, including any methodologies, procedures, techniques, assumptions and other relevant terms or conditions specified in the DSA. 
This report is meant to be read as a whole, and sections of the report must not be read or relied upon out of context. This report is meant to be used in its unaltered form, as delivered by ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING, and any modifications to the report, or the methodologies, procedures, techniques, assumptions used, without the consent of ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING may invalidate the conclusions, outputs or expressions of opinion, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING does not accept any liability in connection with such altered information; and 
Unless expressly stated otherwise in this report, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING has not verified the accuracy, completeness or validity of any information provided to ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING by or on behalf of the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP and ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING does not accept any liability in connection with such information.


Table of Contents
1.	Introduction	1
1.1	Purpose	1
1.2	GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor	2
1.3	ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Trackwork	2
2.	Construction Package Types - Basis of Design Reports Delineation	5
3.	Track Works Submittals	6
3.1	Design Development Submission – Track Works (S-800)	6
3.2	Construction Document Submittal – Trackwork (S-803)	6
4.	Units	7
5.	Abbreviations	7
6.	Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations	9
6.1	Standards, Codes and Regulations	9
6.2	Stakeholders Standards	9
7.	Safety in Design	9
8.	Level of Development	10
9.	Design Input Requirements	10
9.1	General	10
9.2	Survey	11
9.3	Cable Containment	12
9.4	Preliminary Track Assumptions	12
10.	Trackwork Geometric Design Criteria	13
10.1	General	14
10.2	Design Components and Durability Requirements	14
10.3	Alignment Considerations	14
10.4	Design Requirements	14
10.4.1	Acceleration and Jerk (TBC by OMC& Alstom)	15
10.5	Horizontal Alignment	15
10.5.1	General	15
10.5.2	Tangent Sections	16
10.5.3	Curved Sections	16
10.5.4	Superelevation	17
10.5.5	Transition Spiral	19
10.5.6	Speed Restrictions	23
10.5.7	Ride Comfort (TBC with O&M & Alstom)	25
10.5.8	Ride Comfort (TBC with O&M & Alstom)	26
10.6	Vertical Alignment	26
10.6.1	General	26
10.6.2	Grades	27
10.6.3	Vertical Curves	27
10.7	Stationing	29
10.8	Alignment Considerations for Special Trackwork	29
10.8.1	General	29
10.8.2	Turnouts	30
10.8.3	Crossovers	30
10.9	Clearances and Typical Guideway Cross-Sections	30
10.9.1	General	30
10.9.2	Development of Clearance Envelope	30
10.9.3	Clearance on Circular Curves	31
10.9.4	Track Centres	31
10.10	Trackwork Materials	31
10.10.1	General	31
10.10.2	Scope	32
10.10.3	Goals and Objectives	32
10.11	Track Classification	32
10.11.1	General	32
10.11.2	Primary Track	32
10.11.3	Secondary and Yard Track	32
10.11.4	Track Description	32
10.12	Track Construction	33
10.12.1	General	33
10.12.2	Direct Fixation Track	34
10.12.3	Ballasted Track	34
10.12.4	Embedded Track	34
5.12.4.1	Used embedded rail with block rail (LK1 profile)/115 RE rail for most of the tracks to minimize the track height to allow for OCS design and clearances under the existing shed.	34
10.13	Track Construction Tolerances	34
10.13.1	General	34
10.14	Track Components and Materials	34
10.14.1	Scope…….	34
10.14.2	Running Rail	35
10.14.3	Rail Analysis	35
10.14.4	Rail/Wheel Interface Study	35
10.14.5	Rail Stress Analysis	36
10.14.6	Method for Joining Rail	37
10.15	Direct Fixation Track	37
10.15.1	General	37
10.15.2	Design Criteria	37
10.16	Concrete Tie and Direct Fixation Fastener Spacings	38
10.18	Ballasted Track	39
10.18.1	General	39
10.18.2	Ballast…….	39
10.18.3	Ballast Depth Calculation	39
10.19	Concrete Ties and Fastening	39
10.20	Timber Ties	39
10.21	Timber Tie Spacing	39
10.22	Special Trackwork	40
10.22.1	General	40
10.22.2	Turnouts And Crossovers	40
10.22.3	Switch Points	40
10.22.4	Frogs	41
10.22.5	Geometry and Operational Speed	41
10.22.6	Single Crossovers	41
10.23	Track Appurtenance and Other Track Materials	41
10.23.1	General	41
10.23.2	Rail Arrestors / Buffer Stops / Bumping Post	41
10.23.3	Rail Anchors	43
10.23.4	Unbalanced Forces Due to Rail Anchors	44
10.23.5	Derailment Protections	44
11.	Civil Earthworks and Drainage Basis of Design	44
12.	Cable Containment Basis of Design	44
13.	Environmental Basis of Design	44
14.	Electrical Grounding and Bonding Basis of Design	44
15.	Geo-engineering and Hydrology Basis of Design	44
16.	Reference Documents	45

List of Tables
Table 1: Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works Construction Stage Descriptions	3
Table 2: Bundle 2 Development Phase Early Works Construction Stage Descriptions	4
Table 3: List of Abbreviations	7
Table 4: Standards, Codes and Regulations	9
Table 5: Stakeholders Standards and Guidelines	9
Table 6: Topographical and Top of Rail Survey Basis for Rail Corridors	11
Table 7: Design Components and Minimum Design Life	14
Table 9: List of Reference Documents	45

List of Figures
Figure 1: ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Track Works Development Context Plan	2
Figure 2: Delineation of Basis of Design Reports per Construction Package Type	5
Figure 3: Transition Spiral	21
Figure 4: Inserted Spiral	25
Figure 5: Properties of Parabolic Vertical Curves	28

List of Appendices
Appendix A Trackwork Compliances Requirements
Appendix B Geometric Curve Analysis
Appendix C Trackwork Deliverables List
Appendix D Nomenclature
Appendix E Trackwork Technical Specifications List
Appendix F Static and Dynamic Envelope Clearance



1.Introduction
1.1Purpose
Metrolinx (Contracting Authority) has engaged the ONxpress Transportation Partners Inc. Joint Venture (ONxpress) to design and build the GO Rail Expansion-On-Corridor Program (OnCorr).
The purpose of this report is to describe the basis of design for the track and alignment works associated with the ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure track works to deliver passenger service improvements through the implementation of successive configuration states. Each Configuration State (CS) represents a significant upgrade to the GO Transit Railway System infrastructure and service.
This report documents the specific design criteria and fundamental design guidelines to be adhered to throughout the execution of the project, and establishes the:
Minimum design standards
Safety of personnel and equipment
Legal regulatory and statutory requirements
Environmental and sustainable development objectives
Minimum life-cycle costs.
This document is intended for use by the cable containment design team and other design disciplines, as well as any external design consultants engaged to perform design work for the project, whether in direct support or within the scope of external design areas.
This report should be read in conjunction with the latest version of the Project Agreement (PA) and other Construction Stage specific Basis of Design reports, as required. This report is part of the Design Development phase with the objective to:
Document the rationale, criteria, principles, assumptions, and constraints used for the detailed design of the project
Identify discipline design Standards, Codes and Practices to apply to the design approach and maintain consistency and efficiency throughout the Program.
Propose integrated design procedures for elements of scope requiring multiple design disciplines.
1.2GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor
GO Transit is a regional transit system serving the Golden Horseshoe region of Ontario with hub at Union Station in Toronto. It operates on infrastructure that is either owned by Metrolinx (MX territory), or by third parties such as CN or CPR (non-MX territory).
GO Rail Expansion is a program which will provide more travel options for residents and commuters. Upon delivery, the GO Rail Expansion program will provide faster, more frequent, two-way, all-day service on core segments of the GO rail network.
The On-Corridor Works project is a part of the Province's GO Rail Expansion. Under the GO Expansion, the fleet is expected to switch to electric locomotive. There are no further indications of specific vehicle requirements.
1.3ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Trackwork
The Civil Infrastructure Trackwork includes the construction of new and modification of existing sections of track, including alignment, cable containment, grading, drainage, addition, or modification to retaining walls, relocation of utilities, noise barriers, fences, removal or modification of level crossings and modifications to existing stations, foundations for overhead catenary system (OCS), specific to the work required to achieve the Service Level for each Configuration State.

Figure 1: ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Track Works Development Context Plan
This Basis of Design report is initially focused on the Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works identified by ONxpress as the locations of the early design works priority for CJV and CJV Engineering, as illustrated in Figure 1 and summarized in Table 1. This includes design packages at 17 different locations, across the GO Transit Corridors.
Table 1: Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works Construction Stage Descriptions
Go Transit Corridor (Sub-Division)
Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works
Construction Stage Descriptions
Lakeshore West (Oakville)
Stage 3 - Mimico East Extension (OAK 7+900 to 13+050)

Stage 4 - Canpa (OAK 13+050 - 15+250)

Stage 9A - Burlington (OAK 45+600 - 51+400)
Kitchener (Weston – Guelph)
Stage 7A - Etobicoke & Islington (WES 15+600 to 19+950)

Stage 9 - Malton (WES 23+400 to 27+000)
Barrie (Newmarket)
Stage 6 - Maple to Kirby Station (NWM 29+700 to 33+200)

Stage 12A - East Gwillimbury Station (NWM 55+537 to 57+580)

Stage 15 - Bradford Station (NWM 66+022 to 68+536)

C5 - Project 31 Barrie Grading - Contract 2 Project

Stage 19A - Innisfill Station (NWM 86+117 to 92+683)	
Richmond Hill (Bala)
Stage 1 - Don Valley Park (BAL 2+920 to 10+000) Inc Project 81 - Rosedale

Stage 2 - Wexford - Maryvale (BAL 10+000 to 17+900)

Stage 3 - Oriole Station to Old Cummer Station (BAL 17+900 to 25+600)
Lakeshore East (Kingston)
Stage 2A - Danforth St to Kennedy Rd (KNG 7+400 to 12+500)

Stage 3A - Scarborough Jcn (KNG 12+500 to 14+700)	

Stage 9 - Durham Junction (KNG-GO 28+600 to 36+000)

Stage 11A - West Whitby to Oshawa (GO 44+000 to 50+660)
This Basis of Design report may, from time to time, require to be revised as the development phase works priorities shift to the Bundle 2 Development Phase Early Works locations, as summarized in Table 2.
Table 2: Bundle 2 Development Phase Early Works Construction Stage Descriptions
Go Transit Corridor (Sub-Division
Bundle 2 Development Phase Early Works
Construction Stage Descriptions
Lakeshore West (Oakville)
Stage 1 - Exhibition Station (OAK 3+100 to 4+900)-FS

Stage 2 - Humber East (OAK 4+900 to 7+900)

Stage 5 - Port Credit East (OAK 15+250 - 26+000)

Stage 6 - Clarkson West (OAK 26+000 - 29+400)

Stage 7 - Oakville (OAK 29+400 - 35+350)

Stage 8 - Appleby & Bronte (OAK 35+350 to 45+600)

Stage 9B - Burlington (OAK 45+600 to 51+400)
Lakeshore East (Kingston)
Stage 0 - Don Valley Parkway to Gerard (KNG 2+650 to 5+380)

Stage 1 - Gerard to West Danforth (Woodbine Ave) (KNG 5+380 to 7+400)

Stage 2B - Danforth St to Kennedy Rd (KNG 7+400 to 12+500)

Stage 3B - Scarborough Jcn (KNG 12+500 to 14+700)

Stage 4 - Eglinton (KNG 14+700 to 16+750)

Stage 5 - Eglinton to Guildwood (KNG 16+750 to 20+000)

Stage 6 - Guildwood to Morningside Ave (KNG 20+000 to 21+600)

Stage 7 - Morningside to Highland Creek (KNG 21+600 to 24+700)

Stage 8 - Highland Creek to Rouge River (KNG 24+700 to 28+600)

Stage 10 - Pickering to West Whitby (GO 36+000 to 44+000)

Stage 11B - West Whitby to Oshawa (GO 44+000 to 50+660)
Union Station Rail Corridor
USRC Stage 0 Design Works
Scope descriptions of each of the above Construction Stages are documented in a separate Construction Stage Scope Description report, Ref. ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-EGM-RPT-00002.
2.Construction Package Types - Basis of Design Reports Delineation


Figure 2: Delineation of Basis of Design Reports per Construction Package Type
The cross section shown in the figure above is provided for visual purposes only and the values provided in the figure are not to be used for design purposes and does not reflect the proposed design of the track works.
This Basis of Design report covers the design requirements within extents of the corridor right-of-way including new track, grading and drainage at the sub ballast/subgrade level and the edge of sub ballast, noise walls, fences, addition or modification to retaining walls, and foundations for OCS and signal house foundations as depicted in Figure 2.
The design requirements for the civil earthworks, storm water catchment areas and ditches, drainage, adjacent laydown areas and access roads at the limits of and beyond the corridor right-of way are document in the Civil Infrastructure Line Works Basis of Design report (Ref.: ONC-ECW-0000-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001).
The design requirements for the cable containment infrastructure encompassing the cable servitudes / troughs which shall be designed to host Metrolinx and Third Party owned cables within the corridor right-of-way, are documented in the Cable Containment Basis of Design report (Ref. ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00002) 
3.Track Works Submittals
CVJ Engineering shall submit, in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure, Design Development and Construction Document Submittals which shall include the design for Track.
3.1Design Development Submission – Track Works (S-800)
Narrative descriptions of the Track design criteria as well as preliminary plans of Track, roadbed structure, profile, and typical sections of Track arrangements. Narratives shall also describe the alignment of each Service Group within the Site limits and connectivity with Layover Facilities and maintenance and storage facilities.
Preliminary Track specific specifications and preliminary deliverables, including:
Single line staging drawings 
Track Demolition drawings
Track and roadbed drawings, including special Track Works, key plan and legend
Temporary and diversion Track drawings if applicable
Track plans and profiles with horizontal and vertical curves data, alignments data, design speed, alignment coordinates and bearings
Staged Track construction
Locations of key features including but not limited to wayside detectors and lubricators
Typical sections
Restriction critical sections
Track structures and roadbed cross sections
Details with dynamic envelope clearances.
3.2Construction Document Submittal – Trackwork (S-803)
At the Construction Document Submittal stage, CJV Engineering shall submit a Professional Engineer stamped and sealed Track Construction Document Submittal including narrative description of the Track design criteria as well as final plans of Track, roadbed structure, profile, and typical sections of final Track arrangement. Narratives shall include the alignment of the Service Groups within the Site limits and connectivity with the Layover Facilities and maintenance and storage facilities.
Track specific deliverables include:
Single line staging drawings
Track and roadbed drawings, including special trackwork, temporary and diversion Track plans, Track Demolition, key plan and legend.
Track plans and profiles with horizontal and vertical curves data, alignments data, design speed
Staged Track construction.
Locations of key features
Typical sections and restricted area cross sections
Restricted clearance sections
Track structures and roadbed cross sections throughout Metrolinx Territory
Location and details of switch machines, snow clearing devices at switches including connections to power supply points and gas supply points, wayside detectors, lubrication devices and signal control cables.
Details with dynamic envelope clearances.
Together with the Design Development Submittals and the Construction Document Submittals, CJV Engineering shall submit Rail Reports.
4.Units
All units shall be expressed in the form of International System of Units (SI - Metric) unless required to use an alternative unit system (i.e., United States Customary Units - Imperial) by stakeholders or governing body.
5.Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are commonly used in the Project Agreement, Metrolinx ONxpress, Regulators and other stakeholders’ documentation. Some of the terms used are acronyms developed by ONxpress to organize the work of the RER3 program.
Table 3: List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Name
BAR
Barrie – Newmarket GO railway line
BIM
Building Information Model
C5
Schedule C-5 of the Project Agreement
C6
Schedule C-6 of the Project Agreement
CDS
Construction Document Development
CJV
Construction Joint Venture
COT
City of Toronto
DDD
Design Development Definition
DDS
Design Development Submission
EA
Environmental Assessment
EJV
Engineering Joint Venture
GTA
Greater Toronto Area
IFC
Issued for Construction
IFP
Issued for Permit
IFT
Issued for Tender
IO
Infrastructure Ontario
KIT
Kitchener – Weston-Guelph GO railway line
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LOD
Level of Detail
LOI
Level of Information
LOS
Level of Service
LSE
Lakeshore East GO railway line
LSW
Lakeshore West GO railway line
MAPP
Metrolinx Assent Protection Plan
MTO
Ministry of Transportation Ontario
MX
Metrolinx
OCS
Overhead Catenary System
OPSD
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawing
PA
Project Agreement
PLAA
Permits, Licenses, Approvals and Agreements
PS
Paralleling Station
PSOS
Project Specific Output Specifications
RCD
Reference Concept Design
RER
GO Regional Express Rail
RIC
Richmond Hill – Bala GO railway line
SOW
Scope of Work
SPA
Site Plan Control Approval
SWS
Switching Station
TEDI
Thermal Energy Demand Intensity
TGS
Toronto Green Standards
TRCA
Toronto Region Conservation Authority
TPAP
Transit Project Assessment Process
TPFs
Traction Power Facilities
TPSS
Traction Power Sub Station
TTC
Toronto Transit Commission
USEP
Union Station Expansion Project
USRC
Union Station Rail Corridor
6.Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
6.1Standards, Codes and Regulations 
Unless specifically stated otherwise, the design of all buildings, structures and related facilities shall be based on applicable parts of the following codes, specifications, standards, regulations, and other references. In addition to these, the design shall comply with any laws or regulations of local authorities. In the event of conflicting requirements, the most stringent shall apply. The design shall comply with the requirements of all statutory bodies having jurisdiction over any part of the work including Fire, Building and Local Authorities including, but not limited to those listed in Table 4.
Table 4: Standards, Codes and Regulations
Abbreviation
Name
AREMA
2021
NFPA 130
National Fire Protection Association, Standard for Fixed Guideway Transit and Passenger Rail Systems, [latest edition]
CAN/CSA
Canadian Standards Association
AISC
American Institute of Steel Construction
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
ASHRAE
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials
6.2Stakeholders Standards
The following general design standards, codes and guidelines are followed or referred to where applicable:
Table 5: Stakeholders Standards and Guidelines
Abbreviation
Name
MX DRM
GO Design Requirements Manual, 2020
-
GO Transit Track Standards RC-0506-02TRK and Go Transit Standard Plans
GTAA BIM Standards and Attachments
GTAA Record Data Submissions
GTTS Section 25- New Track product Process
Metrolinx standards, specifications, guidelines, bulletins and other documents not listed in the table are not considered applicable to the extent of this project scope of work.
7.Safety in Design
The safety is of paramount importance to the rail system users and stakeholders, and therefore will be reflected thorough in track design. A design safety philosophy will be a part of the design process and will emphasize compliance with legislation, standards, hazard analysis and safety in design principles.  
The design will consider and adopt all requirements of the latest edition of the Canada Occupational Health and Safety Regulations (SOR/86-304), amended on December 7, 2012.
8.Level of Development
The Level of Development (LOD) is a reference tool intended to improve the quality of communication among users of the Building Information Models (BIMs) about the characteristics of elements in the model. RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-IDD-MTX-00001 is the LOD matrix which has been developed for the project and details the development anticipated at each stage of the design phase (i.e., DDD, DDS, CDS, IFC etc.).
9.Design Input Requirements
To ensure that the overall ONxpress Project performance is not jeopardized, it is essential that deviations resulting from assumptions be stated herein, be evaluated, and formally approved prior to adoption.
In instances where specific physical constraints may require deviation, CJV Engineering shall identify specific location(s) and the nature of the deviation(s) and present these to the CJV’s Representative for review and approval. Safety Assurance will be a part of the evaluation process before presenting these to CJV.
9.1General
E&M to provide their design input as per the design schedule
E&M to provide OCS design input
All ICDs will be agreed prior to Consent to design
All hazards will be identified, and requirements will be defined before consent to design
For corridor bundle, 60% design maturity is good to go to market. 90% for Union Station related Bundles. It is assumed that both will happen at the end of DDS. Public and Private Utilities require SUE Field Investigation and TPUs design sign-off to be able to go to the market which is expected to be at the Utility IFC Phase of each Stage. Procurement model for 100% self-performing TPUs i.e., gas and oil are on separate and different schedule outlines by respected TPU
It was assumed that a trenchless construction method for utility relocations across rail tracks should be utilized, to reduce impact to rail ROW, operations, minimize closure times and for safety. The exception to this is at grade separations where large-scale excavations may be planned to occur, in which case open cut may be considered. This assumption should be validated during the detailed design phase and is to be approved by the respective TPU prior to installation
Survey information supplied by Sponsors show accurately the location of the existing structures and surroundings.
9.2Survey
General Detail surveys are made available by CJV as per the design schedule for design to progress.
As per the PA Schedule C-6, there are several types of surveys required for the project works. The following surveys will be incorporated into the track design works, as a design input from CJV:
Topographical Survey
Top of Rail Survey
Survey type and requirements shall be in accordance with RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-SUR-TMO-00001 – Technical Memo EJV Survey Requirements. For areas requiring further detail or specific requirements, a site-specific Topographical Survey Memo will be prepared and provided to CJV. 
At the time of publishing of this document, the following topographical surveys are being used as the basis of design. As more topographical survey data is received, the latest data set shall be incorporated at the appropriate time.
Table 6: Topographical and Top of Rail Survey Basis for Rail Corridors
Item
Corridor
Stage
DDD Survey Basis
Survey Class
1
LSE
Stage 1 - Gerard to West Danforth 1
Tulloch LIO
C
2
LSE
Stage 2 - Danforth St to Kennedy Rd
Tulloch LIO/Groma
C
3
LSE
Stage 3 - Scarborough Jcn
Tulloch/Groma
C
4
LSE
Stage 9 - Durham Junction
Tulloch LIO
C
5
LSE
Stage 11 - West Whitby to Oshawa 
Groma
C
6
STO
Stage 7A - Stouffville Station
Tulloch LIO
C
7
BAR
Stage 6 - Maple to Kirby Station
Tulloch 2015
-
8
BAR
Stage 12A - East Gwillimbury Station
Tulloch 2015
-
9
BAR
Stage 15 - Bradford Station
Bid phase survey
-
10
BAR
Stage 19A - Innisfill Station
Bid phase survey
-
11
RIC
Stage 1 - Don Valley Park
Tulloch 2015 (DTM missing)
-
12
RIC
Stage 2 - Wexford - Maryvale
Tulloch 2015 (DTM missing)
-
13
RIC
Stage 3 - Oriole Station to Old Cummer Station
Tulloch 2015 (DTM missing)
-
14
LSW
Stage 3 - Mimico East Extension 
Tulloch LIO
C
15
LSW
Stage 4 - Canpa
Tulloch LIO/Groma TOR
C
16
LSW
Stage 9A - Burlington
Tulloch LIO
C
17
KIT
Stage 7A - Etobicoke & Islington
Tulloch LIO
C
18
KIT
Stage 9 - Malton
Tulloch LIO
C
9.3Cable Containment
Review the most recent baseline from E&M for OCS and Signaling against current CJV Engineering baseline, identify issues and challenges but develop main principles for cable containment to be adopted in the design development phase,
Identify locations where site conditions will not allow under track crossings as required in E&M's baseline 3.1 cable routing diagrams and work with E&M to adapt design to site conditions while still meeting redundancy requirements.
Commence design development from Baseline 3.1 inputs from E&M on areas where site conditions allow implementation of E&M design as is.
9.4Preliminary Track Assumptions 
Number 24 turnout, 20 double crossover and Fort York Crossing diamond to be developed from bid for Metrolinx approval
Proposed new maximum vertical gradient at 2.8%
Typically, mainline track centres offset equate to 4.1 m. However, most tracks in the USRC are at a minimum of 3.960 m in tangent track due to the space restrictions at this location 
All crossover layouts need to be confirmed by manufacturers/suppliers in the Design Development phase, including concrete tie layouts for complex crossover arrangements
All track baseline designs are based on the OMJV layouts at the time of each baseline released by them. As a result, track layouts may differ from the latest OMJV layouts. It is assumed that the track layouts will be reconciled in the Design Development phase
Where the required Point of Switch (PS) clearance from existing structures, roadways and other PS’s could not be met due to space constraints, in certain cases the design has not followed the requirements and engineering judgment will be applied with the assumptions that Metrolinx will accept derogation requests during the Design Development Phase
Speed profiles only consider GO Transit Trains. It is assumed that freight train speed can be increased as required by the increased super-elevation. We will be analyzing freight train speeds to confirm that safety is not jeopardized with proposed superelevation for passenger trains 
It is assumed that additional ROW may be required at some locations for signalling infrastructure and OCS
Vertical curves - Minimum Rate of change assumed to be 1.20% for sag and 1.50% for crest curves based on the industry best practices
1.753m track Horizontal offset to new platforms + curve allowance
If the ballasted track is designed there will not be a sufficient height to accommodate minimum ballast thickness of 305 mm 
Track designs are based on surveys and data supplied by Metrolinx in the data room. All C-5 projects will require as-built surveys when completed to allow incorporation into the proposed EJV design, changes and mismatches in the current proposed baseline designs for all corridors is possible and will need to be validated during the developmental and detail design phases.
CJV will supply details surveys for the USRC project that meet the design teams requirements, this may be delivered in stages as survey work progress and design accuracy will improve as a result.
USRC West:
West of Fly under. Based on CJV direction, the design exceeds the maximum gradient of 2% at fly under to approximately 3% with the assumption that this deviation from GTTS will be accepted by MLX during the Design Development Phase.
John Street Pedestrian Walkway (MP 0.40) track 1; West of Bathurst Overpass (MP 1.09) along existing second tier retaining wall on track 1; Blue Jays Way Overpass existing support column (MP 0.55) track 5; Spadina Ave Overpass (MP 0.70) south existing support Column. Track 10. Typical clearance envelope of 2.546 m - Existing Structure falls within this envelope. Restricted clearance we assumed a plate envelope of 1.983 m + 1in per degree of curvature, with the assumption that this will be confirmed during the Design Development Phase as it extends the use of the URCS plate further to the west than currently used.
USRC East:
Bay Street and Yonge Street. Existing Railroad bridge structures will have to be evaluated because of track realignment. The track is shifted towards existing safety walkway. In next phase existing structure should be evaluated and confirmation will be required if reducing clearance/width of existing safety walkway.
Union Station:
Used embedded rail with block rail (LK1 profile)/115 RE rail for most of the tracks to minimize the track height to allow for OCS design and clearances under the existing shed.
10.Trackwork Geometric Design Criteria
The trackwork geometric design criteria establishes the basic Civil Engineering Criteria for horizontal and vertical control, alignment, and clearances for train/vehicle dimensions. It additionally provides a summary of the design requirements, considerations, and assumptions to be applied to the design of track on the heavy rail Metrolinx corridors.
The sections that follow provide the general design requirements for all mainline and yard/depot track works for both the diversion tracks and the ultimate ONxpress Configuration Stages (CS).
10.1General
This trackwork geometric design criteria is developed for all sub-divisions of the ONxpress project, accounting for passenger safety, comfort, alignment design as per AREMA Standard and the CI Standards Public Home Page (gosite.ca) and accepted engineering practices currently in use on operating rapid transit and railroad systems.
10.2Design Components and Durability Requirements
The following minimum design life requirements for rail infrastructure shall be considered in the design:
Table 7: Design Components and Minimum Design Life
Asset
Value
Comments
Track – Ballast
20
With proper maintenance
Track – fixed
20
With proper maintenance
Ties
65
With proper maintenance
Track Drainage
50
With proper maintenance
Switches & crossovers
20
With proper maintenance
10.3Alignment Considerations
Minimum tangent lengths between curves shall be designed and/or recommended to ensure sufficient time for passengers to recover from one curve before entering another.
Superelevation on curves to be applied to minimize lateral accelerations felt by passengers and to prevent passengers from feeling as if they are sliding across the seat.
Minimum vertical curve radii to be designed with passenger comfort in mind.
10.4Design Requirements
The design of the alignment shall be conducted to optimize the following requirements:
Maximum speed through all corridor alignments.
Maximum acceptable passenger comfort.
Minimum reconstruction and/or construction cost and maintenance.
10.4.1Acceleration and Jerk (TBC by OMC& Alstom)
During normal operations, sustained acceleration and jerk shall not exceed the following values:
Lateral acceleration			0.75 m/sec2
Lateral jerk					1.0 m/sec3
Vertical acceleration			1.0 m/sec2
Vertical jerk					0.5 m/sec3
Longitudinal acceleration*	1.3 m/sec2
Longitudinal jerk			1.0 m/sec3.
*Longitudinal acceleration limit is the rate of change of velocity (v/t). All other acceleration and jerk limits include effects of grade.
The design approach for the alignment shall be to design for recommended desirable conditions to the maximum possible extent. This shall mean designing for curves with longer than minimum radii, use of longer spiral, use of longer than minimum radius vertical curves, especially if horizontal and vertical curvatures are superimposed. Broken back-to-back curves both horizontally and vertically should be avoided. Vertical and horizontal curves may be superimposed only, when necessary, if none of the lateral, vertical and longitudinal components of acceleration exceed their corresponding allowable limits, as stated above.
10.5Horizontal Alignment
10.5.1General
The purpose of this Section is to establish criteria for use in all design stages of the horizontal alignment of the guideway, station, and depot/yard areas.
The alignment for the diversion tracks and project configuration stages is a function of the existing track geometry. The horizontal clearance between the adjacent tracks must be [3.962 m (13 ft)] plus [50 mm (2 inches)] per degree of curve for the entire length of the circular curve. Where the super-elevation on the outer track exceeds the super-elevation of the adjacent inner track, an additional [63.5 mm (2.5 inches)] per [25.4 mm (1 inch)] of difference in curve super-elevation between the adjacent tracks is required.
The horizontal alignment on mainline track shall consist of tangent sections connected to circular curves by spiral transitions. The maximum operating speed for the mainline revenue track shall be up to 160 km/h (TBC), through stations and on depot approach tracks shall be 60 km/h (TBC), and for secondary and the yard/depot tracks shall be 25 km/h. 
Design should be carried out up to 100 mph (162 km/h). Where feasible, maximum speed will be maintained through the curved track sections by the application of superelevation, which shall be limited to a maximum superelevation of 6” (152 mm) and cant deficiency of 4” (102 mm) maximum. When cant deficiency becomes greater than 102 mm, either the curve radius must be increased, or the design velocity must be decreased to satisfy the above requirement.
10.5.2Tangent Sections
The minimum length of a tangent between curved sections of mainline track, including reverse curves in primary revenue operating track, will be V/2 in meters, where V is in km/h, or 100 (TBC) meters, whichever is larger. Reduction from minimum tangent length may be allowed in special circumstances with written approval.
The horizontal alignment shall be on tangent at all station platforms for the entire length of the platform. The platform length shall be based on a “full train set” length running thorough the station. To maintain constant distance between platform and vehicle, the tangent section shall also extend beyond each end of the platform. The desirable un-superelevated tangent length beyond each end of a platform is usually based on the length of the longest car. 
The absolute minimum of un-superelevated tangent beyond a platform shall be 30 m (TBC).
All special trackwork should be on tangent track, except where an actual location dictates otherwise. The minimum length of tangent track preceding a switch point in both mainline tracks shall be 5.0 m (TBC), except where the movement of the vehicle would entail a reverse curve movement. In this case the criteria for tangent lengths between reverse curves shall apply.
10.5.3Curved Sections
The maximum track curvature for the diversion tracks and the project configuration stages will be approximately [3 degrees 30 minutes].
10.5.3.1Circular Curves
Circular curves shall be defined by their radii in degrees and meters. See Appendix B.
Larger radii shall be used whenever possible to improve rider comfort. The minimum lateral radius of curvature for primary tracks shall be governed by the design speeds and by the limits for superelevation, but it shall not be less than 96 m (315 m) for the mainline, unless approved on a case-by-case basis.
The absolute minimum lateral radius of curvature to be used in secondary and in Depot tracks for 25 km/h shall be 96 m (TBC), subject to the criteria established by the O&M Representative. 
The desirable minimum length of a circular curve shall be V/2 in meters, where V is the design speed in km/h, or 200 m long, whichever is larger. 
The absolute minimum length of fully superelevated curve shall be 180 (TBC) unless the O&M Representative approves otherwise. 
For dual tracks on curves, the smaller of the two radii shall govern the selection of clearance requirements and minimum spacing of track centers.
10.5.3.2Spirals
Spiral curves shall be provided for transition between tangent and circular curved track.
10.5.3.3Compound Curves
The use of compound curves is discouraged. However, they may be used to overcome physical constraints subject to the approval of the O&M Representative. Where two or more circular curves with radii of 1600 m (TBC) or less, are to be connected to form a compound curve, the circular curves shall be joined by spirals, and superelevation of each curve shall be adjusted such that the maximum permissible speed is identical for all parts of the compound curve.
10.5.3.4Reverse Curves
The use of reverse curves is discouraged, but, where necessary, the two curves shall be separated by a length equal to the sum of the two spiral curve lengths. 
Two reverse curves may be connected by a straight alignment. The desirable minimum length of tangent between spiraled curved sections of mainline track shall be V/2 in meters, where V is in km/h, or 30.5 m (100 ft), whichever is larger. Reduction from minimum tangent length may be allowed in special circumstances with written approval of the O&M Representative
10.5.4Superelevation
10.5.4.1General
Superelevation is the incremental vertical height by which the outer rail in a curved track is raised above the inner rail. A superelevation shall be introduced in curves on all tracks were deemed necessary in accordance with the formulae given below. 
Superelevation shall not normally be required on depot/yard, shop and station tracks.
Where horizontal curves are in areas of acceleration and deceleration, consideration should be given to varying the superelevation within the curve to minimize the unbalance forces caused by varying speeds.
The equation given in the following sections are based on a nominal track gauge of 1435 mm and running rail 136 lb. or approved equivalent.
10.5.4.2Equilibrium Superelevation (Ee)
Equilibrium superelevation (Ee) is the theoretical amount of additional elevation of the outer rail with respect to the inner rail on a given curve that is required to balance the centrifugal force at a given speed V, thus reducing the lateral acceleration, “a”, to zero. Ee can be calculated from the equation:
				En = 0.0007* R* V
Where 	Ee = normal superelevation (inch
			V	= design speed (mph)
			R	= degree of curvature (decimal degrees)
10.5.4.3Normal Superelevation (En)
For practical reasons it has been determined that Ee may be decreased to En, which will still provide satisfactory riding comfort. En is defined as the acceptable elevation of the outer rail with respect to the inner rail on a given curve, and is given by the equation:
			En =  (TBC for 136 lb rail)
Where: 	En 	= normal superelevation (mm)
			V	= design speed (km/h)
			R	= radius (m)
			g	= acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s2)
			a	= value for lateral acceleration in g/s
The minimum superelevation in main track curve shall not be less than 13 mm (½”). 
The minimum superelevation for the curve will be greatest of the minimum superelevation based on each applicable type of traffic for the given line (i.e., When considering freight and passenger traffic).
			E= 0.0007*R*V – Eu
E = Superelevation (inch)
R = Degree of curve (decimal degrees)
V = Speed(mph)
Eu= Unbalanced Superelevation (inch)
10.5.4.4Unbalanced Superelevation (Superelevation Deficiency)
Unbalanced superelevation or cant deficiency shall be minimized and designed as close to a balanced condition as possible.
The unbalanced superelevation shall not be greater than 102 mm (4”). In circumstances where the radius cannot be increased due to physical constraints and it is not desirable to reduce the design speed further, the O&M.
Note: The designer shall ensure that use of the above formulae do not create a lateral acceleration greater than 0.075 g up to V = 100mph (161 km/h) km/h. 
Acceptable Range of Superelevation (for circular curves).
Where the introduction of E causes a reduction in design speed from the maximum design speed based on normal train operation, the maximum design speed may be maintained by allowing the lateral acceleration to increase (by the smallest amount necessary) toward but not exceeding 0.075 g.
Where E as determined in the equation above cannot be provided due to alignment restrictions, minimum clearances or for economic considerations, the normal superelevation may be reduced (by the smallest amount necessary). Designer shall identify certain physical constraints and shall present to the O&M Representative for review and comments. However, it should be noted that the rider begins to experience the effect of the curve when the lateral acceleration reaches 0.05 g, and every effort should be made to maintain the lateral acceleration below this value.
10.5.4.5Application of Superelevation
The selection of superelevation required for a particular curve will be dependent on the following criteria:
Maintenance of the maximum speed through the curve.
Providing the desired level of rider comfort.
Choosing the minimum value of superelevation.
The designer shall use desirable values for superelevation wherever possible. If desirable values are not attainable, the superelevation may be reduced (by the smallest amount necessary). 
10.5.5Transition Spiral
For a smooth transition, transition spirals shall be used between tangent track and circular curves with radii less than 1600 meters. During transition from straight track to a curve with superelevation, or vice versa, the rotation of the vehicle must be gradual to maintain comfort, which is associated with lateral acceleration and its change per unit of time, and for reason of safety. Safety is related to the difference in superelevation over the distance between two axles of one bogie. As a result of this distortion the four wheels are not in one plane and the wheel load is thus unevenly distributed. Combined with a horizontal force this can result in climbing of the wheel on the rail and derailment.
10.5.5.1Spiral Length (LS) - TBC
(1)		Ls = 1.63 * Eu* V	(1)
                    Ls= 62* E 		      (2)
Where: 		
Ls	= calculated spiral length in feet
V	= design speed in mph
E	= actual superelevation in inches
Eu	= unbalanced superelevation in inches (shall not be greater than 4 inches)
Note: Formulae are based on nominal track gauge of 1435 mm. All superelevation is based on their value at the end of the spiral.
Equation (1) limits is used to ensure the ride quality around the curve is appropriate for the sped of the passenger train for proposed superelevation.
Equation (2) limits torsion equation to ensure cars can physically negotiate the curve. This equation is designated so that the superelevation is never run off at a rate greater than 24 mm (1 inch) in 189 m (62 feet). For safety reasons, this condition shall always be met.
The spiral length used shall be reduced from the desirable spiral length only in difficult design conditions dictated by alignment geometry or minimum clearances, and then only by the smallest amount necessary.
10.5.5.2Spiral Geometry
Figure 3 indicates the geometry of the transition spiral to be used. The symbols and equations for this spiral are as follows:
Designated Points for Spiral and Circular Curve:
TS	=	point of change from the tangent to the spiral curve
SC	=	point of change from the spiral curve to the circular curve
CS	=	point of change from the circular curve to the spiral curve
ST	=	point of change from the spiral curve to the tangent
PI	=	point of intersection of the two main tangents
SPI	=	point of intersection of the long and short tangents
C.P.I.	=	point of intersection of the tangents to circular curve
P.O.S.	=	point on spiral.

Figure 3: Transition Spiral
10.5.5.3Equation for Spiral and Circular Curve
	   	Ls	= 	actual length of spiral
	   	R	= 	radius of circular curve
	rl	= 	instantaneous radius to point on spiral (P.O.S.)
	l	= 	partial length of spiral curve from TS or ST to any point on the spiral (P.O.S.). The limiting value is Ls.
					= 
DELTA t	(Dt) = total central angle, degrees
                                 = 2qs + DC
THETA s	(qs) = total spiral angle, degrees
                                = 
DC	= central angle of circular curve, degrees
qs	= Ls in radians
2R
Dr	= angle in radians between tangent to spiral at P.O.S. to the long tangent
X	= abscissa distance from TS to SC or ST to CS
= 
Y	= ordinate distance from TS to SC or ST to CS
= 
x	= abscissa distance from TS to P.O.S.
= 
y	= ordinate distance from TS to P.O.S.
= 
L.T.	= long tangent = 
S.T.	= short tangent = 
K	= abscissa distance from the TS to point on circular curve produced
where the circular curve radius is perpendicular to the long tangent of the spiral.
= X - R sin qs
P	= ordinate offset from tangent line through TS to point on circular curve produced where the radius is perpendicular to the long tangent of the spiral
= Y - R(1 - cos qs)
Et	= distance from P.I. to circular curve projected through centre of circle
= 
Ts	= tangent length from TS or ST to P.I.
	= (R+p) tan q/2 +k

Note: All lengths are in meters.
10.5.6Speed Restrictions
The foregoing formulae will enable the designer to establish speed restrictions over sections governed by small radii, low superelevation or short spiral lengths without compromising desirable standards for passenger comfort and vehicle stability.
10.5.6.1Circular Curves
The maximum design speed allowable (with some reduction in passenger comfort) on a circular curve shall be determined by:
              (TBC)			V	= ((E+75) R/11.83)1/2
where:	V	= 	design speed (km/h)
             E	= 	actual superelevation (mm)
		R	= 	radius of curve (m)
10.5.6.2Spiral Transition
The maximum speed on a spiral transition shall be the lowest value from the following formulae:
V	=  			(TBC)

V	=  			(TBC)
	V	= ((E+75) R/11.83)1/2 

where: V	= design speed (km/h)
E	= actual superelevation at the SC or CS (mm)
Eu	= unbalanced superelevation at the SC or CS (mm)
R	= radius of curve at the SC or CS (mm)
Ls	= calculated spiral length (m)
10.5.6.3Inserted Spirals
Inserted spirals shall be used between each pair of superelevated circular curves, which have no intervening tangents.
The minimum length of inserted spiral shall be the greater of the following (TBC):
		(1)	                	Ls = 
		(2)	                   	Ls = 
		(3)				Ls = 0.2 (E1 - E2)
	Where: 	
		Ls		=	actual spiral length (m).
		V			=	speed (km/h).
		E1		=	the larger actual superelevation in the two curves (mm).
		E2		=	the smaller actual superelevation in the two curves (mm).
		Eu1	=	the larger unbalanced superelevation in the two curves (mm).
		Eu2	=	the smaller unbalanced superelevation in the two curves (mm).
The desirable inserted spiral length is twice as long as the calculated minimum inserted spiral length. The inserted spiral length used shall be reduced from the desirable inserted spiral length only in difficult design conditions as dictated by alignment geometry or minimum clearance, and then only by the smallest amount necessary.
If E1-E2 is less than 20 mm and the calculated spiral length is less than 12.0 m, then it is not necessary to use an inserted spiral.

Figure 4: Inserted Spiral
10.5.7Ride Comfort (TBC with O&M & Alstom)
Under normal operating conditions the average values for ride comfort factors can be determined from the following formulae:
Lateral acceleration on the circular curve:
				a 	= 	0.00652 * Eu
				Where:	a	=	lateral acceleration in m/sec2.	
			Eu	=	unbalanced superelevation in mm.
Lateral jerk on the transition spiral:
			J	=	(1.812 V*Eu)/1000*Ls
				Where:
J 	= 	lateral jerk in m/sec3.
V	=	design speed in km/h.
			Eu	=	unbalanced superelevation at the SC or CS point in mm.
			Ls	=	length of spiral in m.
Roll on the transition spiral:
r	=	(0.0106*Ea*V)/Lr
Where:
r	=	roll in degrees/second.
V	=	design speed in km/h.
Ea	=	applied superelevation at the SC or CS point in mm.
Lr	=	length of superelevation runoff in mm.
The following ride comfort indices are acceptable under normal operation conditions:
Désirable maximum latéral accélération (Eu=75 mm)
0.489 m/sec2
Lateral acceleration for “catch-up” speed (Eu=110 mm)
0.746 m/sec2
Desirable lateral jerk
0.245 m/sec3
Maximum lateral jerk
0.490 m/sec3
Desirable maximum rolling
1.0 deg/sec
Allowable maximum rolling
2.0 deg/sec
Only with written approval from the O&M Representative will it be permitted to use indices other than those presented above for rider comfort.
10.5.8Ride Comfort (TBC with O&M & Alstom)
Storage tracks will be sized as large as possible. The maximum length of double ended storage track on mainline will be 300 m (TBC) switch point to switch point. Stub end tracks for storage, turnback and /or end-of-line safety distance must be sized individually with the E&M Systems depending on the train functions, train sizes, grade involved, safety distance and buffer stop slide distance.
10.6Vertical Alignment
10.6.1General
The purpose of this Section is to establish criteria for use in all design stages of the vertical alignment of the guideway, station, and depot/yard areas.
10.6.2Grades
10.6.2.1Mainline and Station Track
Change of grade within length of station platform plus length of the longest car beyond each end of platform is not permitted without the O&M Representative approval. The preferred grade for station areas is 0.0% (although there must be adequate drainage), but maximum gradients up to 0.5%, for above ground stations and 0.3% for underground stations will be allowed. Whenever possible it is preferred, that station be located on a crest of the vertical alignment.
10.6.2.2Inter-Station Track
The maximum desirable sustained grade shall be 3% (TBC). Except where dictated by geometric conditions, downgrades more than 3.0% shall not be used within a 300 meters approach to a station (TBC). 
The minimum desirable length of constant profile grade shall be 100 meters. The minimum length of vertical tangent preceding a point of switch shall be 10 meters (TBC).
A flat (0.0%) grade is acceptable if adequate drainage can be provided. However, in practice alternating longitudinal grades of 0.5%, with drains at the low point, is the most effective way of assuring proper drainage. 
10.6.2.3Yard and Depot Tracks
The desirable grade on storage tracks is 0.0% but the maximum grade shall not exceed 0.3%. Adequate track drainage shall be designed to suit the actual grade. Access from the Depot tracks to mainline shall be on an uphill grade.
10.6.3Vertical Curves
When there are changes in gradient, suitable vertical transition curves must be used to maintain wheel-rail contact. If the vertical acceleration in peak curves is too great, the load on the vehicle springs can be unevenly distributed causing the wheels to climb the rail and thus resulting in derailment. Also, comfort must be ensured, with upward acceleration being perceived more than downward acceleration and, therefore, the use of long curve is desirable. 
All changes in grade shall be connected by a parabolic curve as shown in Figure 10-4.

Figure 5: Properties of Parabolic Vertical Curves
BVC
=
the beginning of vertical curve
EVC
=
the end of vertical curve
VPI
=
point of intersection of tangent to vertical curve
L
=
the actual length of the vertical curve
Lc
=
the minimum length of vertical curve
Lp
=
horizontal distance from BVC to a high or low point of vertical curve
Li
=
horizontal distance from BVC to a point on local tangent
G
=
grade at local tangent
G1, G2
=
the two intersecting tangent grades
d
=
vertical distance from VPI to parabolic curve
dc
=
vertical distance at VPI from parabolic curve to chord
dI
=
vertical distance from local tangent at a distance of Li from BVC
D
=
G2 - G1 (Algebraic difference of adjoining grades)
d
=
dc = 
di
=
4Li2d/L2
di
=
DLi2/200L
G
=
G1 – LiD
Lp
=
G1L
 D
Note:	Distance L, d, dc, Lp, Li is in meters.
	Grade G1, G2, D, G are in percent.
10.6.3.1Radius of Curvature and Length of Curve
For current trains/vehicles the minimum desirable length of the vertical curve shall be the larger of the following:
(1)			Lc = (D*V*K)/A
	where: 
Lc		= length of vertical curve (feet)
D		= absolute value of the adjoining grades expressed as a decimal
V		= design speed (mph)
K		= 2.15 conversion factor to give Lc in feet
A		= vertical acceleration in feet/sec//sec(ft/sec2)
				  (A=0.1 for passenger and 0.6 for freight)
The minimum length for vertical curves for both sags and summits are determined by formula stated above but shall not be less than 30.48 m (100 ft).
The minimum length of tangent between two vertical curves shall be 100 m (TBC).
If circular vertical curves are used a minimum radius of 610 m (2,000 ft) for crest and 1,220 m (4,000 ft) for sag, shall be considered as the absolute minimum. 
10.7Stationing
Stationing for trackwork shall be along the centerline of the tangent, spiral and curved sections for each track. It shall follow the arcs of the spirals and the curves and not the chords.
The outbound and inbound tracks must be stationed completely independent of each other. When stationing each whole station shall equal 1000 meters and calculations shall be accurate to the millimeter. Stationing equations are to be avoided wherever possible.
10.8Alignment Considerations for Special Trackwork
10.8.1General
Special trackwork is all trackwork necessary where tracks converge, diverge, or cross each other, as well as those required to provide allowance for thermal movement in the rail. 
Details of geometry, operating speed, components, location, etc., of special trackwork will be given in Trackwork Design Criteria - Special Trackwork Geometry. The information given here is limited to general alignment considerations in turnout and crossover areas only.
10.8.2Turnouts
Turnouts should be located on constant grade and tangent track. There shall be no superelevation in special trackwork unit. Superelevation for high-speed turnouts will be allowed. 
The maximum grade on ballasted turnouts shall be 2.0% and through direct fixation turnouts can be up to 5%. (TBC).
10.8.3Crossovers
Crossovers are designed to move trains from one parallel track to another. Two back-to-back turnouts shall be used for development of a crossover, with a length of tangent between the two turnouts. The length of the tangent track between the turnouts depends on the dual track center spacing, and turnout angles, but should always be greater than the length of one car.
All turnouts and crossovers on the mainline track shall incorporate tangential geometry, fixed and/or moveable frogs (each turnouts size TBC by O&M Representative) and in the depot shall incorporate tangential geometry with rigid (fixed) frogs.
10.9Clearances and Typical Guideway Cross-Sections
10.9.1General
The purpose of this Section is to define the vehicle clearances and typical guideway cross-sections, which are required throughout the System. The Designer of the system shall ensure that all the requirements are observed and allowed for in sizing various elements of the system.
The criteria developed in this Section apply to the design of the entire system including the yard/depot area.
10.9.2Development of Clearance Envelope
10.9.2.1Static Outline
The static outline of the proposed vehicle is shown in Appendix F (Figure 3.9.3.1). The static envelope is critical for the walkway and cable containment design and for clearance to the top of the station platform. Therefore, the height from the top of rail to the top of floor covering of the vehicle is critical in the setting out for the height of walkway and the station platform.
10.9.2.2Dynamic Outline (Maximum Bodyline Displacement)
The dynamic envelope is important to clear any obstructions. The vehicle dynamic outline, as shown in Appendix F was developed to allow for all forces and conditions affecting the vertical, lateral, and rotational displacements of the vehicle under various conditions. This is shown as the maximum bodyline displacement, which is defined as the space occupied by a vehicle in the worst-case scenario for body width and height.
10.9.2.3Vehicle Clearance Envelope
The vehicle clearance envelope is defined as the space occupied by the vehicle in the maximum bodyline displacement condition in Appendix F an additional 100 mm around the perimeter of this outline. The vehicle clearance envelope represents the minimum clearance of the face of permanent structure from the vehicle, anywhere in the system. In the case of passing near existing structures and to avoid demolition, this minimum as an absolute minimum for very limited lengths can be reduced only with written approval. Station platforms and walkways are excepted.
For all Static and dynamic Envelops and Clearances see Appendix F.
10.9.3Clearance on Circular Curves
The vehicle clearance envelope must be adjusted to account for the effect of outswing (overhang), inswing (throw-over) and superelevation. 
The inswing and outswing shall be calculated as per AREMA Standards for these dimensions.
10.9.4Track Centres
The minimum track centers for the diversion tracks and the project configuration stages will be [4.1 m].
10.10Trackwork Materials
10.10.1General
1.This Preliminary Design Criteria presents a part of the Trackwork Design and the purpose of which is to ensure that all proposed items will be in accordance with the Client requirements. It includes trackwork design approach criteria to meet the requirements for the Trackwork – ONxpress Project.
2.The basis of this is all applicable design criteria, codes and standards, interface requirements with other subsystems and accepted industry practices.
3.Also, some design principles and criteria will be developed from experiences with operating system of Metrolinx and their O&M regarding trains, systems and guideway elements.
4.Using different criteria and codes, the designer will develop a design that will be compatible with achieving the desired design life, performance and features of an integrated system.
5.This preliminary design criteria addresses the critical issues for the trackwork design relating to the selection of the rail, direct fixation fasteners, special trackwork, concrete ties and rail buffer stops. This criterion also emphasises the magnitude of thermal rail forces, rail stress analysis, direct fixation fastener analysis, broken rail conditions, unbalanced forces in special trackwork, rail buffer stop criteria, ballast stress analysis and concrete tie load analysis.
6.The preliminary track criteria will be based on the current AREMA Standards and Metrolinx Standards and Regulations.
7.To minimize the amount of redundant work, the preliminary design guideline is restricted to the typical and general arrangements, special structures and special trackwork areas.
10.10.2Scope
The scope of work covered by this document is from the top of the sub-grade up to the top of the rail for ballasted track, and from the top of the concrete slab surface up to the top of the rail for direct fixation track, including any second pour concrete where required and special trackwork.
10.10.3Goals and Objectives
The prime factors in the trackwork design will be passenger safety, comfort, low wheel and rail maintenance, as well as noise and vibration control, economy, maintainability, constructability.
10.11Track Classification
10.11.1General
There are two classes of the track:
Mainline (Primary) Track.
Secondary and Yard Tracks.
10.11.2Primary Track
Primary track shall be designed and constructed for the operation of the vehicles carrying revenue passengers and nonrevenue tracks, which include pocket tracks. All primary tracks shall be designed and constructed of continuous welded rails (CWR).
10.11.3Secondary and Yard Track
Secondary and Yard will consist of the tracks for the purpose storing vehicles not carrying revenue passengers. All secondary and yard tracks will be designed and constructed of CWR. 
Yard track will have no superelevation.
10.11.4Track Description
10.11.4.1General
For tangent and curved tracks, horizontal alignment shall be based on the centreline of the track equidistant between the gauge sides of the rails.
A vertical profile shall be based on the top of the low rail.
10.11.4.2Track Gauge
All tracks shall be designed as the standard gauge 1435 mm (56 ½ inches), measured at a point 16 mm below the top of the running rail. Curved track tolerances are +3/4 inch and –1/4 inch.
Gauge widening is required for curves larger than 14 degrees (as per Metrolinx Standard GTTS, Table 6).
10.11.4.3Rail Inclination
Rail inclination is a measure of the inward inclination angle of the installed rail measured perpendicular to the cross level of the two rails.
The primary, secondary and yard tracks shall be designed and constructed 1:40, inward inclination of the rails except for track within the limits of special trackwork units. The transition between canted and non-canted rail will be achieved through twist rails for concrete ties.
Rail inclination on the standard primary track shall be obtained by use of the canted fasteners for direct fixation tracks, and rail inclination on ballasted tracks shall be obtained by sloping of the tie at the rail seat. Rail in special trackwork shall be designed with no inward inclination of the rail for speed up to 100km/h (TBC). For high speed special trackwork shall be designed with superelevation (TBC by special trackwork supplier).
The transition 1:40 cant and non-canted rail in special trackwork will be achieved through twisting rails only.
10.11.4.4Rail Superelevation
Maximum superelevation shall be limited to 152 mm (6 inches) in the circular curve. 
The superelevation of rail shall be achieved by rotating the high rail above the low rail.
10.12Track Construction
10.12.1General
10.12.1.1The trackwork will be divided into the following types (TBC):
Direct Fixation Track (Pearson sub viaduct, Danforth elevated structure, Scarborough dive structure).
Ballasted Track (all mainline and secondary tracks).
Embedded Track (Union Station)
RMF sheds will have a multitude of track types.
10.12.2Direct Fixation Track
10.12.2.1Direct fixation track can be designed and constructed on bridges and at-grade sections. 
10.12.2.2The rail will be fastened to the structure by resilient direct fixation fasteners, which will be bolted into second pour concrete slabs.
10.12.2.3Direct fixation track shall utilize resilient plate fasteners. 
10.12.2.4The trackwork designer shall determine interlocking requirements of second pour concrete slabs, so that these are incorporated in the civil/structural design.
10.12.3Ballasted Track
10.12.3.1Ballasted track shall utilize pre-stressed concrete ties, which are preferred over the use of timber ties for the long-term maintenance requirement of the track.
10.12.3.2Timber ties can be designed in the yard. 
10.12.3.3Spacing of concrete and timber ties shall conform to current AREMA Standards.
10.12.4Embedded Track
5.12.4.1	Used embedded rail with block rail (LK1 profile)/115 RE rail for most of the tracks to minimize the track height to allow for OCS design and clearances under the existing shed.
10.13Track Construction Tolerances
10.13.1General
10.13.1.1All standard track and special trackwork components will be designed and fabricated to minimum tolerances that conform to the track construction tolerances as specified in AREMA Standards and Metrolinx Standards for trackwork construction. 
10.14Track Components and Materials 
10.14.1Scope…….
10.14.1.1This section provides an overview of the key track components and materials. 
10.14.2Running Rail
10.14.2.1General
New running rail for both main tack and secondary tracks shall be standard 136 lb. The exceptions are at the Pearson airport link and the Union Station train shed area that will be 115RE and block rail section (TBC). 
All running rails shall be manufactured, fabricated, inspected, and tested in accordance with current requirements of the American Railway Engineering Association (AREMA) Manual for Railway Engineering, Chapter 4, Rail, except as modified in the running Rail Supply Contract Document.
All running rails shall be supplied undrilled in the standard nominal 23.8 m metre lengths to minimize the number of welds and bonded joints required, unless dictated by physical constraints restricting the lengths of the rails that can be transported to the site.
Running rails will be welded into continuous welded rail (CWR).
10.14.2.2Standard Carbon Steel Rail
Running rails shall be standard carbon steel rails, minimum 310 Brinell hardness, minimum yield tensile strength 600 MPa, minimum ultimate tensile strength 1000 MPa, manufactured in accordance with current AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering, Chapter 4 “Specification for Steel Rails”.
10.14.3Rail Analysis
10.14.3.1Continuous Welded Rail (CWR)
CWR shall be designed on all primary, secondary and yard tracks, including the special trackwork. CWR has been chosen to minimize long term maintenance; provide smoother and better ride quality; and reduce wear and tear on train equipment including wheel wear.
10.14.3.2Zero Thermal Stress Range
All CWR track shall be designed to be laid to zero thermal stress. The maximum ambient temperature range in Greater Toronto area is between - 40°C and +70°C. 
10.14.4Rail/Wheel Interface Study
If required, a study needs to be prepared to analyse wheel/rail interface and confirm a compatibility between the proposed running rail and wheels of the current trains running all corridors. 
10.14.5Rail Stress Analysis
An analysis of rail stresses caused by thermal, vehicular loads and structural loads shall be carried out for the 136 lb. running rail to determine the adequacy of the rail steel to perform safely under operating conditions.
10.14.5.1Baseline Design Assumptions
The following baseline design assumptions shall be used in the rail stress analysis:
Maximum design rail temperature:	 TRmax = + 700C
Minimum design rail temperature:	TRmin = - 40 0 C
Crush Loaded Vehicle (AW3) weights:	133,000 kg (293,000 lbs)
Empty vehicle (TBD)
Dynamic load factor (TBD)
Design Wind speed (TBD)
Design Wind Pressure (TBD)
Wind loading at 60% of maximum wind load for rail stress analysis, 30% for rail break analysis and lateral load analysis.
Maximum design velocity on mainline: 		V = 160 km/h.
Maximum design velocity in the yard:		V = 25 km/h
Overall length of vehicle, between couplers:	(TBD).
Spacing of concrete and timber ties (TBD)
Maximum lateral acceleration on mainline:		0.075g
Maximum lateral acceleration in the yard:		0.1 g
Minimum radius of horizontal curve on mainline:	(TBD)
Minimum radius of horizontal curve in the yard:	(TBD)
136 lb. running rail Grade 90:	Yield strength 	Fy = (TBC)MPa
Tensile strength Fs = (TBC) MPa
Distance between centers of rails: 		(TBC) mm
Acceptable longitudinal gap between adjacent ends of rails at rail break: 75 mm.
Gap for Anchoring CWR
The gap between CWR strings for anchoring to zero thermal stress shall be determined by using the following formula:
G = (To-Ta) x L x @ + Q
Where is 	G = Rail gap in metres.
Ta = Actual rail temperature in Celsius degree.
To = Optimum anchoring temperature in Celsius degree (zero thermal stress).
L = Length of unanchored rail in metres.
@ = Coefficient of the thermal expansion. 
Q = Rail gap prescribed for welds.
10.14.6Method for Joining Rail
Continuous strings of rails to form CWR shall be joined by aluminothermic welds. 
Flash Butt Welding - Continuous strings of rails for mainline will be welded using the flash butt welding process. 
10.15Direct Fixation Track
10.15.1General
Direct fixation rail fasteners shall be designed for attaching rail to the concrete second pour track-bed on all primary tracks. 
10.15.2Design Criteria
10.15.2.1Direct fixation rail fasteners shall be chosen considering the following criteria:
CWR/structure interface forces.
the ability to achieve and maintain desired rail tolerances.
the ability to prevent rail buckling under high temperature.
the ability to withstand fatigue and wear of fasteners components with low maintenance requirements.
the ability to reduce airborne noise and vibration to an acceptable level.
the ability to withstand the local environment without the need to replace components.
10.15.2.2Rail Break Analysis
Broken rail forces are those forces, which are transferred to rail fasteners and concrete ties in longitudinal shear by the fasteners when a pull-apart occurs. The pull-apart force is resisted both by concrete ties or bridge structure and the unbroken rails. The distribution of the broken rail forces shall be determined by the Civil Designer as they are site and structure specific. The probability that more than one rail break will occur at the same time on a given bridge structure is very small, and this event should not be considered in the design.
10.15.2.3Rail Gap Analysis
The most probable location for a rail break, other than at weld locations, is at or around an expansion joint of the support structure since the tensile stresses in the rail are high at this location. After the rail break, the rails adjacent to the breaking point will move apart creating a gap until the cumulative restraints developed by the fasteners are large enough to resist additional movement. As the rail slides through the fasteners, the force in the rail near the position of the rail break reduces to zero. The forces in both the rail and concrete ties or structure will then increase as the rail continues to translate until maximum longitudinal restraint is attained.
10.16Concrete Tie and Direct Fixation Fastener Spacings
The governing factors of ties and fasteners on tangents will be based on, will be as follows:
maximum allowable pull apart gap during rail break.
allowable tensile bending stress in rail foot.
longitudinal restraint specified per fastener.
allowable deflections of the rail and fasteners.
The governing factors of fasteners on curves will be based on, are as follows:
Lateral restrain capabilities of the fastener.
Allowable offset between the rails and allowable pull apart gap in the event of the rail break.
Allowable tensile bending stress in rail foot.
Longitudinal restrain specified per fastener.
Allowable deflections of the rail and fasteners.
10.17 	Electrical Isolation Properties Grounding at Crossovers 
An effective grounding system is required:
For the protection of maintenance personnel and passengers.
For the power system equipment.
For the protection of control and communications equipment.
To prevent corrosion of structures resulting from stray currents, however with a fourth rail power system stray current is not a concern.
To achieve these design parameters, the running rails along the full length of the system are utilized to form a continuous ground path.
To achieve these design parameters, the running rails along the full length of the system are utilized to form a continuous ground path.
10.18Ballasted Track
10.18.1General
Except in special trackwork areas, ballasted track will be designed for the use of concrete tie and ballast. 
10.18.2Ballast…….
The ballast used for concrete tie installation will be designed to comply with requirements of current AREA Manual for Railway Engineering, Chapter 1 “Roadway and Ballast” as specified for concrete tie installations.
10.18.3Ballast Depth Calculation
The Ballast design requires a minimum ballast depth of 220 mm below the bottom of the tie. The largest allowable pressure between tie and ballast will be limited to 450 kPa as recommended by AREA Standard. The largest admissible pressure at the ballast or sub-ballast interface with the sub-grade will be limited to 138 kPa.
The sub-ballast shall be designed to comply with mechanical, permeability, chemical and environmental characteristics as required in the current AREA Manual of Railway Engineering, Chapter 1 “Roadway and Ballast” as specified for sub-ballast. Sub-ballast material will be selected based on sub-grade and ballast compatibility as well as drainage and local climatic conditions. 
10.19Concrete Ties and Fastening
Concrete ties are designed as a monobloc pre-stressed reinforced concrete tie conforming to the current AREA Manual Railway Engineering, Chapter 10 “Concrete Ties” and accommodate inserts for the running rail and fastening support. 
The precast concrete ties are designed to conform to practices specified in CAN3-A23.3-M standard. Concrete, aggregate, metal reinforcement, prestressing operations, steel reinforcement, concrete cover and surface finish are designed to conform to the current AREA Manual for Railway Engineering standard. 
10.20Timber Ties
Timber ties will be provided in the yard to accommodate the special trackwork. Timber ties will be designed and supplied to conform the current AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering, Chapter 7 “Timber Ties”.
Timber ties will be hardwood species suitable for the climatic and environmental conditions prevailing in Toronto area.
10.21Timber Tie Spacing
Timber tie spacing will be designed in accordance with current requirements of AREMA Standards. 
10.22Special Trackwork
10.22.1General
10.22.1.1The term special trackwork is used to designate those trackwork units requiring special plates and machined parts necessary where tracks converge, diverge or cross one another.
10.22.1.2Special trackwork will be designed and supplied as new, manufactured, fabricated, inspected and tested in accordance with current AREMA Standards, except as modified in the Special Trackwork Supply and on the Drawings. 
10.22.1.3All rail ends are designed for zero rail gap and drilled for 914 mm, 6-hole joint bars in accordance with current AREMA Standard, “Rail Drilling, Bar Punching, and Track Bolts” as shown on the Standard Drawing. 
10.22.1.4All fabrication tolerances for special trackwork have to be conformed with acceptance track tolerances. All components will be designed such that the specified tolerances can be maintained throughout the operating life of the special trackwork with minimal maintenance.
10.22.1.5Special trackwork components must be compatible with the interface and operation of the proposed switch machines. 
10.22.1.6All special trackwork will be designed with due consideration to noise and vibration sensitivities, and is supplied as complete units, having similar resilience characteristics at adjacent plain tracks.
MORE DESCRIPTION TO COME
10.22.2Turnouts And Crossovers
10.22.2.1Configuration
Turnouts and crossovers will be designed and selected in accordance with the following criteria:
Turnouts and crossovers in primary track will be designed for the use of No. 24 lateral turnouts and moveable point frogs. 
Turnouts in the yard tracks will be designed with rigid frogs. 
10.22.3Switch Points
MORE DESCRIPTION TO COME
Switch points shall interface with the switch machine and switch heating. 
10.22.4Frogs
Frogs on turnouts and crossovers for primary track will be supplied with moveable point, except as noted otherwise. This requirement is intended to reduce the noise level in special trackwork area. 
MORE DESCRIPTION TO COME
10.22.4.1Moveable Frogs
The moveable point frog will be designed and fabricated with connections to the throw and detector rods for the attachment of the switch machine. A frog nose clamping plate will be directly attached to the moveable point frog and connected to the throw and detector rods via an adapter plate. The plates will be designed to resist twisting under the applied force of the switch machine.
Moveable frogs shall interface with the switch machine and switch heating.
10.22.4.2Fixed Rigid Frogs
Frogs on turnouts and crossovers will be designed and supplied with rigid frogs.
10.22.5Geometry and Operational Speed
For speed calculations please see Appendix B.
10.22.5.1General
Special trackwork will be designed on constant grade on tangent track. The maximum grade of the special trackwork will be designed on 5.0% grade. 
Special trackwork will be designed with no superelevation and no inward inclination of the rail, except for high-speed turnouts.
10.22.6Single Crossovers
10.22.6.1Single crossovers will be designed on the parallel tracks.
10.23Track Appurtenance and Other Track Materials
10.23.1General
10.23.1.1This Section specifies the requirements for installing track appurtenances and other track materials. 
10.23.2Rail Arrestors / Buffer Stops / Bumping Post
10.23.2.1Rail arrestors are designed to be capable of providing protection against injury to persons either directly behind the track or on board the impacting vehicle and damage to impacting vehicles due to an overrun caused by mechanical failure or human error. The rail arrestor is intended to bring the impacting vehicle to a stop on the track.
10.23.2.2The choice of the rail arrestor will be dictated by the amount of kinetic energy resulting from the train mass, impact velocity and then maintaining a balance with the maximum retardation rate allowed the amount of track available and the amount of force that the impacting vehicle can withstand. The rail arrestor shall dissipate energy through friction without transferring load to the structural slab supporting track structure.
10.23.2.3A rail arrestor will be designed and installed at the end of each operating track:
10.23.2.4Train Loading:
Mass of Bombardier Bi-Level Coach: 61,000 kg
Number of Coaches: 12
Total Tare Weight: 732,000 kg
Passenger Capacity of Singe Coach: 150 Seated + 25% Standing = 188
Passenger Loading of Single Coach: 17,860
Total Passenger Load: 214,320 kg
Locomotive MP 40 Diesel Engine: 129,280 kg
Total Design Mass = 1,075,600 g
Striking Speed: 15 km/hr
Factor of Safety: 1.5
Length of Bumping Post and Sliding Distance: 15 m
Maximum Deceleration: 0.3 g
Couplers and anti-climbers' specifications. See attached Drawings.
Track Characteristics at Union Station.
Table 8: Union Station Rail Corridor Proposed Track Forms (TBC)
Track Name
Horizontal Geometry
Vertical Geometry
Rail Type
Striking Speed
Trackform
Track 2
Tangent
+0.255% towards bumping post
115RE
15km/hr
Second Pour Embedded Track Supported on Structural Slab
Track 5W
Tangent
0.257% away from bumping post
115RE
15km/hr
Second Pour Embedded Track Supported on Structural Slab
Track 9E
15m Tangent followed by 1468m Radius Curve
0.00%
115RE
15km/hr
Second Pour Embedded Track Supported on Structural Slab
Track 9W
15m Tangent followed by 1468m Radius Curve
0.00%
115RE
15km/hr
Second Pour Embedded Track Supported on Structural Slab
Track 10W
42m Tangent Followed by 700m Radius Curve
0.138% away from bumping post
115RE
15km/hr
Second Pour Embedded Track Supported on Structural Slab
Track 13E
Tangent
0.00%
136RE
15km/hr
Ballasted Track Supported on Structural Slab
Track 13W
Tangent
0.00%
136RE
15km/hr
Ballasted Track Supported on Structural Slab
Gauge: 1435 mm.
Bumping post shall be electrically isolated from running rails.
Bumping post shall be designed for striking with coupler as well as anti-climber.
Manufacturer shall provide detailed energy dissipation calculation based on the criteria above.
10.23.3Rail Anchors
Rail anchors are designed to restrain the rail from moving longitudinally when thermal conditions dictate. The designed rail anchor is a resilient type of anchor, which will allow the rail to move vertically under load and yet prevent the rail from moving longitudinally under different thermal conditions. They are required and designed for use in areas where the CWR becomes discontinuous, primarily in special trackwork areas.
10.23.4Unbalanced Forces Due to Rail Anchors
The unbalanced forces are based on the scenario that the special trackwork units will be secured by rail anchors, which are directly fixed to the rail and anchored into the concrete deck structure. The forces at the rail anchor locations will be transferred directly into the structure and the structure must be designed to resist these unbalanced forces.
10.23.5Derailment Protections
Derailment protections are required as per Transport Canada Rules Respecting Track safety and the GTTS standards, where required to protect track conditions, equipment or on trackwork, where allowed by Operating Conditions.
Derailment protection shall be compatible with APTA 240 Wheel profile and in compliance with GO/AREMA Standards.
11.Civil Earthworks and Drainage Basis of Design
The Design Basis for the Corridor wide civil infrastructure line works, earthworks, roads and OCS foundation designs are specified separately in the Corridors - Civil Infrastructure Line Works Design Basis/Design Criteria report in accordance with the Project Agreement and any construction work package constraints. Included are foundations, retaining and noise walls design
12.Cable Containment Basis of Design
The Design Basis for the Corridor wide cable containment design is specified separately in the Corridors – Cable Containment Design Basis / Design Criteria report in accordance with the Project Agreement and any construction work package constraints.
13.Environmental Basis of Design
The Design Basis for Corridor wide environmental design is specified separately in the Environmental Design Basis / Design Criteria report in accordance with the Project Agreement and any construction work package constraints.
14.Electrical Grounding and Bonding Basis of Design 
The Design Basis for Corridor wide electrical grounding and bonding design is specified separately in the Electrical Grounding and Bonding Design Basis / Design Criteria report in accordance with the Project Agreement and any construction work package constraints.
The design will be a fully coordinated and integrated grounding and bonding system which will account for the future electrification of the Metrolinx rail system.
15.Geo-engineering and Hydrology Basis of Design
The Design Basis for Corridor wide geo-engineering and hydrology design is specified separately in the Geo-engineering and Hydrology Design Basis / Design Criteria report in accordance with the Project Agreement and any construction work package constraints.
16.Reference Documents
Table 9 lists key documents that have been used in the development of this document.  
Table 9: List of Reference Documents
Document No.
Report Name
ONC-ECW-0000-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001
Basis of Design – Corridors – Civil Infrastructure Line Works
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001
Basis of Design – Geo-engineering
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00002
Basis of Design – Corridors – Cable Containment
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00010
Basis of Design – Utilities
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-ENV-DES-DCR-00001
Basis of Design – Environmental
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00012
Basis of Design – Electrical Grounding and Bonding
EJV Design Schedule BL Rev.0 (March 6 2023).xlsx
EJV Design Schedule

Appendix A
Trackwork Compliances Requirements


Source module
Num Heading
Primary Text
Applicable Section(s) &
 Basis of Design Document Number
Engineering Lead Comments
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.2.27
Project Co shall submit the Union Station Track Slab Repair Report in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
N/a
To be addressed if required
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.7.16
Project Co shall submit the Track Isolation Report in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.17

Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.8.1
Project Co shall submit the Design Development Submission – Track Works in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3
Submission S-800
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.8.2
Project Co shall submit the Railway Track and Grading Implementation Plan in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3
Submission S-803
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.8.5
Project Co shall submit the Track Ballast Material Reports in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3 and 4.17
CJV will contract personnel to inspect and issue report - Submission S-804
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.8.6
Project Co shall submit the Rail Reports in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3 and 4.14.3
Submission S-805
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.9.6
Project Co shall submit the Code Compliance Report in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.1.3
(a) For Section C.14 – Union Station of this Schedule C-6, unless the context requires otherwise, the direction “north” should be interpreted as the direction perpendicular to the 1929 Retaining Wall and facing the Union Station Headhouse with all other cardinal directions in this Schedule C-6 being derived from this interpretation of the direction north.
N/A
Drawings reference to be added later by Jadranka. Verify against CAD/BIM standard.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.5 (a)
(a) Project Co shall design the components of the Project to meet the minimum design life requirements set out in Table A.3-1.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.5 (a) Table A.3-1
Asset: Track – ballast
Design Life Required (years): 20
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.2, Table 4.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.5 (a) Table A.3-1
Asset: Track – fixed
Design Life Required (years): 20
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.2, Table 4.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.5 (a) Table A.3-1
Asset: Ties
Design Life Required (years): 65
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.2, Table 4.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.5 (a) Table A.3-1
Asset: Track Drainage
Design Life Required (years): 50
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.2, Table 4.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.3.5 (a) Table A.3-1
Asset: Switches & crossovers
Design Life Required (years): 20
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.2, Table 4.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (a)
(a) Project Co shall submit an initial set of Record Drawings, As-Built Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals (“Record Drawings, As-Built Drawings and Operations and Maintenance Manuals”) to Contracting Authority for review in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
N/A
Construction Scope of Work
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (b)
(b) Initial Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals for all disciplines where Infrastructure is necessary for Train Service Plans shall be submitted by Project Co to Contracting Authority no later than six (6) months prior to the submission of the Consent to Operate Submission as set out in Schedule A-5 – Safety and System Assurance.
N/A
Construction Scope of Work
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (c)
(c) Initial Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals for all disciplines where Infrastructure is not necessary for Train Service Plans shall be submitted by Project Co to Contracting Authority no later than six (6) months prior to Substantial Completion.
N/A
Construction Scope of Work
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (e)
(e) Project Co shall finalize the Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals where Infrastructure is necessary for Train Service Plans (incorporating the comments from Contracting Authority) and submit final Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals to Contracting Authority no later than three (3) months prior to the Consent to Operate Submission as set out in Schedule A-5 – Safety and System Assurance.
N/A
Construction Scope of Work
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (f)
(f) Project Co shall finalize the Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals where Infrastructure is not necessary for Train Service Plans (incorporating the comments from Contracting Authority) and submit final Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals to Contracting Authority no later than three (3) months prior to Substantial Completion.
N/A
Construction Scope of Work
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (g)
(g) Project Co shall provide engineering documentation and Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals for any Third-Party Infrastructure in compliance with the requirements of the third party.
N/A
Construction Scope of Work
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.1 (b)
(b) Design of all elements of the various system designs shall be developed to operate reliably in the environment in which they are installed. Project Co shall design all systems elements to integrate with the environmental conditions present including ambient temperature range, humidity, precipitation and other environmental factors that will impact operation. 
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.14.3.2 & 4.14.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.1 (d)
(d) Project Co shall coordinate with Emergency Services Providers to develop trackside elements in all areas required for Emergency Service Provider access including:
N/A
Parent clause
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.1 (d)
(i) track construction type;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.12

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.1 (d)
(ii) special trackwork layout and equipment protection;
N/A
To be defined later. CJV, E&M and O&M
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.1 (d)
(vi) any additional information to accommodate access with Emergency Services Providers;
N/A
To be defined later.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.1 (e)
 (e) Project Co shall ensure that any trackside element placed within the trackway is designed to withstand the worst-case loading of an emergency vehicle and that any facilities providing emergency vehicular or emergency personnel access to the trackway are designed to accommodate emergency vehicles, personnel, and equipment adequately and safely, to address both vehicular and personnel entry points into the track.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.14.5

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.3 (a)
(a)               Project Co shall develop and implement nomenclature (“Nomenclature”) as a means of identifying, labeling and tracking equipment and assets to comply with this Schedule C-6 and Part B-3 –Fixed Asset Maintenance. The Nomenclature shall adhere to the defined terms under the Project Agreement to the extent applicable and shall be developed to allow for easy identification of System and Facility elements to support operational decisions, maintenance activities, and alarm management.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.5.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.3 (b)
(b) Project Co shall ensure the Nomenclature includes a method for system-wide labeling that includes Service Group, functional description of the element, and a unique sequential identification number, with the functional description containing information related to the type of element and being an alpha numeric designation to represent the specific field element based on the Project Co system architecture.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.5.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.3 (c)
(c) The Nomenclature including the functional description codes, shall be documented in the Project Co EAIS and the Project Co MMIS.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.5.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide track and associated equipment in compliance with the requirements set out in the GO Transit Track Standards (GTTS). For clarity, should Project Co propose an alternative product or process than those within the GTTS then Project Co shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 25 – New Track Product Process, of the GTTS.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (b)
(b) Project Co shall prepare and submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure Project Track standards for the New Project Co Infrastructure and the New Third-Party Infrastructure that incorporate Project Co’s own track construction and maintenance requirements and the track standards set out in the GO Transit Track Standards (GTTS) (the “Project Co Track Standards”). 
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.2
Review impacts of Turnout 24, if approved.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (c)
(c) Project Co shall execute the Initial Works related to track within the Metrolinx Territory.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (e)
(e) Project Co shall provide connections to the infrastructure, matching existing horizontal and vertical alignment while correcting existing deficiencies.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (f)
(f)               In addition to the requirements defined in Section B.1 (a), Project Co shall comply with the clearance requirements in Table B1.1 and Table B.1.2.
N/A
Parent clause
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (f) Table B.1.1
Table B.1.1: Clearance Envelopes on Metrolinx Territory
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (f)Table B.1.1
Table B.1.1: Clearance Envelopes on Non-Metrolinx Territory
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (f)Table B.1.1
Table B.1.1: Clearance Envelopes on Non-Metrolinx Territory
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (g)Table B.1.2
Table B.1.2: Clearance Envelopes on Non-Metrolinx Territory 
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(h) Project Co shall submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure Design Development Submittals which shall include the design for Track, roadway, Utilities, geo-engineering, and stormwater and drainage (the “Design Development Submission – Track Works”). The Design Development Submission – Track Works shall include:
N/A
TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(i) a narrative description of the Track design criteria as well as preliminary plans of Track, roadbed structure, profile and typical sections of final Track arrangement;
N/A
TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(ii) a narrative describing the alignment of each Service Group within the Site limits and connectivity with Layovers and maintenance and storage facilities;
N/A
TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) preliminary drawings, full size plan view at no less than 1:1000 horizontal scale and profile view at 5H:1V scale including:
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) A. single line staging drawings;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3
Submission S-800
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) B. Track Demolition drawings;
N/A
CJV to provide inputs, EJV to produce drawings
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) C. Track and roadbed drawings, including special Track Works, key plan and legend;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3
Submission S-800
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) D. temporary and diversion Track drawings if applicable;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3
Submission S-800
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) E. Track plans and profiles with horizontal and vertical curves data, alignments data, design speed, alignment coordinates and bearings;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Appendix B.

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) F. staged Track construction;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) G. locations of key features including but not limited to wayside detectors and lubricators;
N/A
To be determined by OMC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) H. typical sections;
See Line Station Checklist, Trackwork Section 2&3,ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-QMT-CKL-00001.xlsx

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) I. restriction critical sections;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) J. Track structures and roadbed cross sections; and
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.12 Section 4.12.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iii) K. details with dynamic envelope clearances;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9.2.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(iv) the Track roadbed design and construction approach;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.11.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(v) correlation activity; and


Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (h)
(vi) preliminary track specifications.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.11.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) At the Construction Document Submittal stage, Project Co shall submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 a Construction Document Submittal specific to Trackwork (the “Construction Document Submittals – Track Works”) in accordance with all the following:
Part of Deliverables List for Trackwork

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) Project Co shall submit Construction Document Submittals for the following Service Groups:
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section - See below

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) A. Lakeshore East;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) B. Lakeshore West;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) C. Kitchener;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section - 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) D. Barrie;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) E. Stouffville;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) F. Richmond Hill; and
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(i) G. Union Pearson Express.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) Project Co shall submit a Professional Engineer stamped and sealed Track Construction Document Submittal, including:
N/A
Parent clause
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) A. a narrative description of the Track design criteria as well as final plans of Track, roadbed structure, profile and typical sections of final Track arrangement;
See deliverable List for Trackwork

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) B. a narrative describing the alignment of the Service Groups within the Site limits and connectivity with the Layovers and maintenance and storage facilities;
Deliverable List for Trackwork 

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. drawings, full size plan view at no less than 1:1000 horizontal scale and profile view at 5H:1V scale including:
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. i. single line staging drawings;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. iii. Track plans and profiles with horizontal and vertical curves data, alignments data, design speed;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Appendix B.

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. v. locations of key features;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. vi. typical sections and restricted area cross sections;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. vii. restricted clearance sections;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. viii. Track structures and roadbed cross sections throughout Metrolinx Territory;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.12.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. ix. location and details of switch machines, snow clearing devices at switches including connections to power supply points and gas supply points, wayside detectors, lubrication devices and signal control cables;
N/A
TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. x. details with dynamic envelope clearances; and
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. xi. B. correlation activity;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. xi. C. the Railway Track and Grading Implementation Plan;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.18.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(ii) C. xi. D. final specifications; and
See Deliverable List for Trackwork Specifications  

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (i)
(iii) Project Co shall ensure that all engineering calculation sheets shall be numbered, dated and indexed. The index sheets shall define the total number of the sheets submitted and shall bear the seal and signature of an engineer holding a Professional Engineer’s license to practice in the Province of Ontario and who is responsible for the design.
See Deliverable Lists for Trackwork Repot & Calculations

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (j)
(j) Together with the Design Development Submittals and the Construction Document Submittals, Project Co shall submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure test result reports for track ballast and sub-ballast material (the “Track Ballast Material Reports”).
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1 (k)
(k) Together with the Design Development Submittals and the Construction Document Submittals, Project Co shall submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure test result reports for rail (the “Rail Reports”).
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.1.2 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide all Special Trackwork required to comply with the GTTS, the requirements of Schedule B2-1 - Train Service Planning and to provide Project Co with whatever operational flexibility it requires to fulfill its obligations under the Project Agreement.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.3 (a)
(a)  Project Co shall provide grading, including earth and rock excavation and embankment construction, and management of excavated material in compliance with MTO, OPSS 206 – Grading for Earth and Rock Excavation. 
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.3 (b)
(b) Project Co shall provide grading to include excavation of native material and fill materials as required for construction in compliance with the recommendations resulting from Project Co’s geotechnical design.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.3 (c)
(c) Project Co shall submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure. a railway Track and grading implementation plan (the “Railway Track and Grading Implementation Plan”) that includes the following design briefs:
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.3 (c)
(iv) grading plans;
N/A
Grading is included in Civil Design Criteria
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.3 (c)
(v) approach to Track structure design based on Site specific geotechnical data, existing bridge structure data and new structures; and
N/A
It is included in Interface Design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.4 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide the subgrade to meet the standards for suitability of materials, compaction and stability as follows:
N/A
It is Included in Civil Design Basis
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.4 (a)
 (i) MTO, OPSS 212 – Earth Borrow; and
N/A
It is Included in Civil Design Basis
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.4 (a)
 (ii) MTO, OPSS 501 – Compacting.
N/A
It is Included in Civil Design Basis
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.4 (b)
(b) Project Co shall provide a qualified and licensed Geotechnical Engineer to determine the suitability of subgrade material to support the required loading.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.4 (c)
(c) Project Co shall provide stabilization of all exposed slopes by appropriate means in compliance with Metrolinx Standards.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.4 (d)
(d) Project Co shall provide disposal of surplus material or unsuitable material in compliance with Section A.4.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.5 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide sub-ballast material complying with the requirements of OPSS.MUNI 1010, Granular B Type II and in accordance with the following:
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.18.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.5 (a)
 (i) placement of sub-ballast shall comply with MTO, OPSS 501 – Compacting for granular material; and
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.18.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.3.5 (a)
 (ii)               sub-ballast shall have a minimum depth of 305mm in Mainline Track or larger depth as determined by Project Co’s analysis.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.18.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (b)
(i) D. Project Co shall provide the New Uxbridge South Track from the Kingston Subdivision and tie into the existing double-track North of Corvette Avenue.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 1.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (d)
(iv) The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained.

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (e)
(iii) Project Co shall provide vertical clearance of 7.6 meters between the underside of the bridge and the proposed top of rail.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (e)
(iv) Project Co shall provide vertical clearance of 6.710 meters between the underside of the bridge and the existing track and diversion track measured from top of rail.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (e)
(xv)  Project Co shall ensure stairs land directly on pathways and or sidewalks as close to the Municipal owned streets as practicable; and
n/a

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (f)
(ii) The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained.

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (g)
(ii) The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained.

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (h)
(ii) The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained.

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (k)
(ii) The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained;

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.2 (m)
(iii) A. Project Co shall carry out safety analyses to determine the requirements for railway traffic collision protection. 

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.3 (a)
(ii) A. iii. The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments of the Network shall be retained.

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.3 (a)
(ii) B. ii. The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments of the Network shall be retained.

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.3 (a)
(iii) A. ii. The existing horizontal and vertical alignments of Thickson Road shall be maintained in the final configuration.

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(i) A. Expansion of the Barrie Service Group requires that the number of roads to rail Grade Crossings along the Newmarket Subdivision be reduced to enhance safety and to support performance and operational objectives. The Newmarket Subdivision portion of the Barrie Service Group generally runs in a north/south direction from Allandale to Parkdale (Junction with the Weston Subdivision). From Parkdale the service continues to Union Station along the Weston Subdivision.

TBC
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(i) B. The expansion of Existing Structures is also required to accommodate one additional Mainline Track to the Network on the Newmarket Subdivision.
TBD

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(ii) A. iii. The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained.
TBC

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(ii) A. iv. The new structure shall accommodate the existing track and two additional future tracks west of the existing track.
TBC

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(ii) B. iii. The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments shall be retained.
TBC

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(ii) B. iv. The new structure shall accommodate the existing track and one additional future track west of the existing track.
TBD during the design 

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(iii) A. i. Should existing track infrastructure prevent Project Co from complying with Schedule A-4 – Passenger Service Requirements, Schedule B1-4 - Performance Requirements and Schedule B2-1 - Train Service Planning then, Project Co shall provide New Project Co Infrastructure in compliance with the following requirements:
TBD during design development

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(iii) A. i. 2. The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments of the Network shall be retained.
TBC after a final survey

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(iii) B. i. Should existing track infrastructure prevent Project Co from complying with Schedule A-4 – Passenger Service Requirements, Schedule B1-4 - Performance Requirements and Schedule B2-1 - Train Service Planning then, Project Co shall provide New Project Co Infrastructure in compliance with the following requirements:
TBC after detailed design

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(iii) B. i. 2. The existing vertical and horizontal track alignments of the Network shall be retained.
TBC

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(ii) A. iii. Should existing track infrastructure prevent Project Co from complying with Schedule A-4 – Passenger Service Requirements, Schedule B1-4 - Performance Requirements and Schedule B2-1 - Train Service Planning then, Project Co shall provide New Project Co Infrastructure in compliance with the following requirements:
TBC after sufficient design development

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.4.5 (a)
(ii) A. i. Should existing track infrastructure prevent Project Co from complying with Schedule A-4 – Passenger Service Requirements, Schedule B1-4 - Performance Requirements and Schedule B2-1 - Train Service Planning then, Project Co shall provide New Project Co Infrastructure in compliance with the following requirements:
TBC after sufficient design development

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.1 (a)
(a) Project Co shall ensure:
n/a
Parent clause
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.1 (a)
(i) all new track and modifications to existing track defined in this section B.5.3, B.5.4, B.5.5, B.5.6 and B.5.7, shall comply with this Schedule C-6, Section B. 
TBC

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.1 (a)
(iii) all new turnouts shall be a minimum of #12 Special Turnouts, configured to accommodate train speeds of 25 mph, except as otherwise explicitly noted. For clarity larger Turnouts may be provided in accordance with the Project Co solution. 
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.21

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.2 (a)
 (a) Project Co shall comply with the following standards, as amended, or updated from time to time:
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.2 (a)
(a) (i) GO Transit Track Standards;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.2 (a)
(a) (ii) Project Co GO Transit S&C Standards as specified in Schedule C-6;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.2 (a)
(a) (iii) GO Transit Track Welder Manual;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.14.6

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.2 (a)
(a) (iv) GO Transit Crushed Rock Track Ballast Specifications;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.18.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.2 (a)
(a) (v) GO Track Standard Plans, latest edition;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.2 (a)
(a) (vi) GO Transit Design Requirements Manual; and
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.2 (a)
(a) (vii) the AREMA Manual.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.1

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.3 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide a new RH #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 318.92 (200 feet west of Beechgrove Drive) connecting into Crompton Industrial Spur (43°45’51.88”N, 79°09’09.80”W), including
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.21

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.3 (b)
(b) Project Co shall extend the existing non-main north service track U238 with new track eastward to from the new Signalized Switch at MP 318.92.
N/A
TBC after more design 
development
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.3 (c)
(c) Project Co shall retrofit the existing LH #12 turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 319.75 and relocate this existing #12 turnout further west to MP 319.86 (200 feet east of Manse Road) connecting Track 1 into Crompton Industrial Spur (43°45’36.72”N, 79°10’15.93”W), including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.3 (e)
(e) Project Co shall extend the existing non-main north service track U238 further westward with new track connecting into the relocated LH #12 turnout at MP 319.86 (43°45’36.72”N, 79°10’15.93”W).
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.3 (f)
(f) Project Co shall retrofit the existing LH #12 turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 319.73 Rohm & Haas (43°45’38.27”N, 79°10’07.32”W), including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide:
N/A
Parent clause
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (a)
(i) a new RH #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 10.86 (Approx. 43°42’23.42”N, 79°33’36.80”W) on the new Track 1;
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (a)
(ii) a new #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at Approx. MP 11.00 on the north service track, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (a)
(iii) a new non-main track connecting the new Track 1 and the north service track.
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (b)
(b) a new RH #12 Crossover comprising two (2) new #12 Turnouts equipped with Signalized Switches at MP 11.30 and MP 11.35 (43°42’22.65”N, 79°34’17.74”W) to connect new Track 1 and north service track;
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (c)
(c) Project Co shall provide a new LH #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 11.78 (43°42’21.65”N, 79°34’41.69”W) to the south service track, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (d)
(d) Project Co shall;


Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (d)
(i) Provide a new LH #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 16.42 (43°42’15.03”N, 79°40’15.91”W); and
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.4 (d)
(ii) Retrofit the existing Turnout at MP 16.46 (43°42’14.84”N, 79°40’18.50”W) with a new Signalized Switches including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide a new LH #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 11.40 (43°45’42.73”N, 79°28’48.10”W) of the Newmarket Subdivision onto the west service track, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (a)
(i) a new Signalized Derail.
n/a
TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (b)
(b) Project Co shall provide a new right-hand Crossover comprising two (2) new #12 Turnouts equipped with two (2) new Signalized Switches at MP 11.86 and MP 11.81 to replace the existing turnout at MP 11.86 (43°46’6.74”N, 79°28’52.88”W), between the west service track and west main track, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (b)
(i) a new Signalized Derail on the west service track.
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (c)
(c) Project Co shall provide a new non-main west service track from the new Signalized Switch at MP 11.81 to MP 12.79 in accordance with this Schedule C-6, Section B.

To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (d)
(d) Project Co shall relocate the existing RH #12 Turnout at MP 12.28 (43°46’28.48”N, 79°28’57.40”W) from the west main track to the new west service track and provide a Signalized Switch, including:
n/a
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (d)
 (i) a new Signalized Derail.

TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (e)
(e) Project Co shall provide a new LH #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 12.29 (43°46’29.02”N, 79°28’57.30”W) onto the east main track, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (e)
(i) a new Signalized Derail.

TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (f)
(f) Project Co shall provide a new RH #12 Turnout with new Signalized Switch at MP 12.79 (43°46’56.56”N, 79°29’3.01”W) of the west main track onto the new west service track, including
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (f)
(i) a new Signalized Derail.

TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (g)
(g) Project Co shall provide a new RH #20 Crossover comprising two (2) new #20 Turnouts equipped with two (2) new Signalized Switches at MP 13.87 (Approx. 43°47’18.26”N, 79°29’7.63”W) and MP 13.94 (Approx. 43°47’21.68”N, 79°29’8.13”W) between the east and west main tracks.
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (h)
(h) Project Co shall provide a new Turnout with new Signalized Switch on the west main track at MP 18.61 onto the new west service track.
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (i)
(i) Project Co shall provide a new non-main west service track from the new Signalized Switch at MP 18.61 to MP 18.68 in accordance with this Schedule C-6, Section B.

To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (j)
(j) Project Co shall relocate the Turnout with new Signalized Switch at Argo Lumber MP 18.68 on the new west service track, including:
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (j)
(i) a new Signalized Derail.

TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (k)
(k) Project Co shall provide a new Turnout with new Signalized Switch at MP 18.61 on the west main track onto the new west service track.
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (l)
(l) Project Co shall provide a new Crossover comprising two (2) new Turnouts equipped with two (2) new Signalized Switches at MP 19.29 between the east and west main track.
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (m)
(m) Project Co shall provide a new Turnout with new Signalized Switch and new non-main track at the south end of Anco Chemical Spur MP 19.1 onto the east main track, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (m)
(i) a new Signalized Derail.

TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (n)
(n) Project Co shall provide a new Turnout with new Signalized Switch at the north end of Anco Chemical Spur MP 19.29 onto the east main track, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (n)
(i) a new Signalized Derail.
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (o)
(o) Project Co shall provide a new Signalized Switch at King Lumber MP 24.16, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (o)
(i) a new Signalized Derail.

TBD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (a)
(a) Project Co shall provide a new LH #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 9.02 (43°35’48.62”N, 79°32’08.15”W) connecting to Track 3 and construct approximately 400 feet of new non-main track westward into Wakefield Canada Inc, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (a)
(ii) relocate existing LH Turnout at MP 9.10 Track 3 onto new non-main service track.
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (a)
(iii) relocate existing LH Turnout at MP 9.12 Track 3 onto new non-main service track.
n/a
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (b)
(b) Project Co shall provide a new LH #12 Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 9.32 (43°35’39.88”N, 79°32’26.30”W) connecting Track 1 into Flintcote Lead at MP 9.32 of the Oakville Subdivision, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (c)
(c) Project Co shall retrofit the existing LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 16.16 (43°31’6.99”N, 79°37’39.90”W) connecting Track 3 into Clarkson Industrial Area, including: 
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (d)
(d) Project Co shall provide a new LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 24.19 (43°25’20.28”N, 79°42’59.11”W) connecting to Track 3 into OC32 JEMPAK Canada, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (d)
(ii) Removal of existing LH Turnout OC32 (43°25’18.53”N, 79°43’00.55”W) and reconfiguration of JEMPAK Canada lead track to allow for the signalization of the Switch at MP 24.19.
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (e)
(e) Project Co shall provide a new LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 24.28 (43°25’17.38”N, 79°43’02.10”W) connecting to Track 3 and OC31 Procor Ltd., including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (f)
(f) Project Co shall retrofit the existing LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 25.65 (43°24’19.65”N, 79°44’02.17”W) connecting to Track 3 into CertainTeed Gypsum, including:
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (g)
(g) Project Co shall provide a new LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 25.94 (43°24’6.89”N, 79°44’15.40”W) connecting Track 3 into Petro-Bronte, including:
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (h)
(h) Project Co shall provide a new RH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 26.70 (43°23’36.74”N, 79°44’46.84”W) connecting Track 3 into Petro-Bronte, including: 
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (i)
(i) Project Co shall retrofit the existing LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 27.72 (43°22’53.29”N, 79°45’31.99”W) connecting to Track3 into Appleby Lead;
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (i)
(i) Project Co shall extend OC81 Appleby Lead track, relocate the turnout 1000' East of existing position, and close the main track gap resulting from the switch removal.
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.6 (j)
(j) Project Co shall retrofit the existing LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 28.54 (43°22’21.31”N, 79°46’5.88”W) connecting to Track 1 into Dominion Nickel Alloy including: 
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.5 (k)
(k) Project Co shall provide a new LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 28.64 (43°22’15.08”N, 79°46’11.83”W) connecting to Track 3 into RHI Canada. 
N/A
To be addressed in Trackwork Specification for Special Trackwork
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.5.7 (a)
(a) Project Co shall retrofit the existing LH Turnout with a new Signalized Switch at MP 59.65 (43°43’47.66”N, 79°15’41.10”W) into the GECO Spur. 
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (b)
(b) Project Co shall not be permitted to realign any existing tracks, in the following locations within the Union Station Rail Corridor west throughout the Project Term;
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (b)
(i) Between MP 0.40 and 0.55:
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (b)
(i) A. south of the existing Oakville-Kingston south connector track;
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (b)
(i) B. between existing tracks C1 and A3; and
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (b)
(i) C. north of existing track B.
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (c)
(c) Project Co shall not install any permanent infrastructure in the ballast, sub ballast and sub grade levels of the areas detailed in Section B.6.1(b)(i) throughout the Project Term.

TBC. To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (e)
(e) Project Co shall not be permitted to realign any existing tracks, within the corner coordinates defined in Table B.6.1 – USRC Passive Protection Coordinates within the Union Station Rail Corridor west throughout the Project Term;

TBC. To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (f) Table B.6.1
Table B.6.1 - USRC Passive Protection Coordinates
N/A
N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (f)
(f) Project Co shall not install any permanent infrastructure in the ballast, sub ballast and sub grade levels of the areas defined below:
N/A
PARENT CLAUSE
TBC. To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (f)
(i) North of existing track BNY1 between MP 0.7 and MP 0.75 where the existing Bathurst North Layover Facilities Substation and Bathurst North Layover Facilities Crew Center are currently located inclusive of all ancillary spaces and staff parking, which Project Co shall demolish and remove from site.

TBC. To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track and Civil Works
B.6.1 (g)
(g) Project Co shall realign the existing track to accommodate the existing tracks to provide space to provide the new Spadina GO Station as defined in Section C13 of this Schedule.

TBC. To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.6 (b)
(i)                 Project Co shall relocate the Train markers on the modified platform and provide new Train markers in compliance with Project Co’s operational safety requirements.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.3 (c)
(iv)             Project Co shall provide a new pedestrian walkway to provide direct Barrier Free access connection from the east of the existing vehicle access gate at Dawes Road sidewalk to the east end of the existing north platform; and
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.10 (b)
(ii)               Project Co shall respect minimum construction clearances dictated by the utility companies.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.12 (a)
(iii)     Project Co shall provide a new Mainline Track to the east of the existing Mainline Track, following the proposed alignment between MP 6.5 and MP 7.8 of the Newmarket Subdivision.
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.13 (c)
(c)     Project Co shall realign existing Mainline Track B0 from its current alignment, to accommodate the new island platform;
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.13 (d)
(d)     Project Co shall realign existing Mainline Track B1 from its current alignment, to accommodate the new island platform;
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.1 (c)
(iii) J. a Track slab finite element structural analysis report in accordance with the requirements set out in this Schedule C-6;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.12.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.1 (c)
(iii) M. a construction methodology narrative, including a description of the plan to construct or modify the Platforms, Track slab, Platform canopies, Concourses, Teamways and any New Service Corridors; and
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.1 (c)
(iii) N. identification of any Overhead Contact System support structures throughout the site including retrofitting of Existing Structures;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.1 (c)
(iv) F. a report of the CCTV surveys of all associated piping for the Track slab drains including all CCTV footage;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.1 (c)
(iv) H. iii. mechanical room layouts showing locations, physical sizes, equipment, and incoming and outgoing services that demonstrate compliance with required clearance envelopes and the ability to service equipment;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.2 (j)
(x) F. i. Track and signal infrastructure;
Addressed in Interface Document:  ICD E&M#13 VS E-Loco/CJV

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.5 (b)
(i) A. ii.                  comply with design, protection, and monitoring requirements for excavations adjacent to railway tracks in conformity with the AREMA Manual and MGGDRBS;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.8 (c)
(iii) A. i.                    Where an existing track is removed as part of the Initial Works and replaced by a New Trainshed Platform, Project Co shall provide a system of skylights over the Smoke Vent that formerly serviced that track. Project Co shall provide a system of skylights that:
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.8 (d)
(i) A.                 Project Co shall demolish Track 1 to Track 12 inclusive as required to construct the Initial Works.
N/A
Parent clause
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.8 (d)
(ii) A.                 Project Co shall provide eight Reinstated Tracks within the footprint of existing Track 1 to Track 12 inclusive that are continuous throughout the length of the Union Station Trainshed. The Reinstated Tracks may be realigned relative to the existing tracks. 
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.8 (d)
(ii) B.                 Project Co shall additionally realign Track Q and Track R if/as required by its design.
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.8 (f)
    (i) A. i.                    construct Stub Tracks and Stub Platforms to comply with the obligations defined in Schedule A-4 – Passenger Service Requirements and Schedule B2-1 - Train Service Planning;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.8 (f)
(i) A. v.                adhere to the clearance envelopes for adjacent tracks.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.15 (e)
(iv) B. Project Co shall provide ballast mats that conform to the requirements of the MGGDRBS.
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.15 (a)
(a) Should existing station infrastructure prevent Project Co from complying with Schedule A-4 – Passenger Service Requirements, Schedule B1-4 - Performance Requirements and Schedule B2-1 - Train Service Planning then, Project Co shall provide New Project Co Infrastructure in compliance with the following requirements: 
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.15 (c)
(c) Should Project Co modify the Station then Project Co shall provide the following:
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.15 (c)
(i) Project Co shall provide sufficient length of additional new Mainline Tracks which. supports the Project Co Operational Plan;
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.15 (c)
(iv) Project Co shall modify the existing Green Lane East grade crossing to accommodate the new Mainline Track defined in Section C.15(c)(i);
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.16 (a)
(a) Should existing station infrastructure prevent Project Co from complying with Schedule A-4 – Passenger Service Requirements, Schedule B1-4 - Performance Requirements and Schedule B2-1 - Train Service Planning then, Project Co shall provide New Project Co Infrastructure in compliance with the following requirements: 
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.16 (c)
(c) Should Project Co modify the station then Project Co shall provide the following:  
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.16 (c)
(i) Project Co shall not extend the existing platforms east beyond Markham Main Street or west beyond Sinder Drive. These existing roads right of way shall not be modified nor impacted by any platform extension by Project Co.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.17 (b)
(b) Should Project Co modify the station then Project Co shall provide the following:
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.17 (b)
(i) Project Co shall modify the following existing infrastructure:
n/a
parent clause
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.17 (b)
(i) (A) the existing west platform shall be extended to the north by 115 meters following the Project Co proposed alignment.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.19 (c)
(c) Project Co shall not modify the existing rail over road bridge structure over Trafalgar Road, except for the provision of additional track infrastructure within the confines of the existing bridge structure.
N/A
To be addressed in more detail design
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(v) Project Co shall undertake a non-linear analysis of all impacts of the Initial Works for rail-structure interaction, considering the elasto-plastic behaviour of the DF Fasteners;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.12.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(v) A. A rail-structure interaction report which fully describes the methodology, and includes analysis results and conclusions which demonstrate the criteria have been fully met and incorporated into the design of the modifications to the elevated structure; and
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.14.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(v) B. Criteria for stresses arising from rail-structure interaction effects are defined in the Metrolinx Design Criteria Manual, Light Rail Transit 
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.15.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) A. GTAA BIM Standards and attachments;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) B. GTAA CADD Standards and attachments;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) C. GTAA Record Data Submissions;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 3.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) D. BFSM – Building;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) E. G02_FM-0055 SOP Guide to Providing Data for Assets Requiring Maintenance;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) F. LOD Matrix.
See Attachment C-LOD Metrix

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) G. GTAA Labeling and Standards Manual and Transformers;
See Attachment - GTAA Labelling and Standard Manual and Transformers

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) H. Autodesk Revit GTAA Project Location Template, Project Parameters Template and Shared Parameters;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) I. all drawings and datasets shall be in .pdf & .dwg;
See Deliverable Trackwork Drawing Lists

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) J. scanned information shall be in RCP format;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) K. manufacturers information and technical data in .pdf format;
N/a

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) L. building information model in Autodesk Revit &IFC; and
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xx) M. Rmax data schedules in .xlsx format; and
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xxi) Project Co shall prepare and submit to GTAA for approval a Design Building Information Model, Construction BIM Execution Plan and Contractor Progress Model throughout the implementation of the Initial Works using the GTAA templates for review and approval by GTAA and in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure:
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xxi) A. Project Co shall allow 10 Business Days for review of each submittal:
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xxi) B. All Rmax data shall being assigned the correct Rmax data schedules; and
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (c)
(xxi) C. All data fields containing Rmax data templates shall be populated.
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (d)
(i) A. the existing elements and conditions, including topography, bridge and railway geometry, and Utilities, existing and proposed vertical and horizontal clearances, and expected and/or intended Works on the structure for conversion to electrical multiple unit vehicles, and its impacts to the existing bridge and site, and associated mitigation, if any;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (d)
(i) B. existing and proposed Track profiles and cross sections showing the extent of the proposed Works;
See Appendix C - Trackwork Deliverable Lists

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (d)
(i) H. means and methods to protect the LINK train;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (d)
(i) I. identification of conflicts with existing elements, including Utilities;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (d)
(i) L. rail-structure interaction analysis;
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.14.3

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.20 (e)
(i) design calculations, drawings (for example, general arrangement plan elevation and typical bridge/Track section, working drawings, sketches, sections, and details, general notes, etc.), and narrative report with sufficient content and detail that includes:
Appendix C - See Trackwork Deliverables List 

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.2.2 (v)
(i) A. existing elements and conditions, including topography, roadway and railway geometry, and Utilities, existing and proposed vertical and horizontal clearances, and expected/intended Works on the structure for the inclusion of the Electrification Infrastructure and/or Track lowering, and its impacts to the existing bridge and site, and associated mitigation, if any;


Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.2.2 (v)
(i) B. existing and proposed Track profiles and cross sections showing the extent of the excavation/removal of material relative to adjacent substructure location(s), drainage, etc. for bridge sites involving proposed Track lowering;
N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.4.7 (b)
(iv) the material specifications, which shall include UV resistance, mechanical strength and wet and/or dry resistance.
Appendix C - Trackwork Deliverables List

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.6.3 (c)
(c) Project Co shall not decrease the existing minimum vertical or horizontal clearances to the railroad and/or roadway/walkway being spanned by the existing Overhead Bridge.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.6.4 (c)
(c) Project Co shall not decrease the existing minimum vertical or horizontal clearances to the railroad, roadway, and/or waterway being crossed by the existing bridge.
Basis of Design – Corridors Trackwork and Track Alignment, Doc. No.: ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004, Section 4.9


Appendix B
Geometric Curve Analysis


Horizontal Curve Calculations (sample)
Vertical Curve Calculations (sample)



Appendix C
Trackwork Deliverables List




Appendix D
Nomenclature







Appendix E
Trackwork Technical Specifications List


01110 SUMMARY OF WORK
02315 EXCAVATION
02316 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL FOR UNDERGROUND DUCT WORK
02345 GEOTEXTILE FOR TRACK APPLICATION
02346 GEOGRID FOR TRACK APPLICATION
02620 SUBDRAINAGE
02725 SUBBALLAST
02725 BALLAST
05651 RAIL WELDING
05655 TRACK APPURTENANCES AND OTHER TRACK MATERIAL
05671 BALLASTED TRACK INSTALLATION
03410 MONOBLOCK CONTRETE CROSS TIES
03411 CONRETE SWITCH TIES
05650 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TRACK
05681 BALLASTED SPECIAL TRACKWORK
05690 RAILS
DF TRACK CONSTRUCTION
DURECT FIXATION FASTENERS
STEEL TIES
COMPOSITE TIES.


Appendix F
Static and Dynamic Envelope Clearance


	 















