Basis of Design – Grounding & Bonding
TEXT HIGHLIGHTED IN YELLOW TO BE CONFIRMED AND/OR DETERMINED





04/21/2023
D01.03
DDD Interdisciplinary Review
S. Farshad
H. Rezaei Avval
J. Malik
R. Orsi
Date
Rev.
Status
Prepared By
Checked By
Approved By
Approved By
MM/DD/YYYY




DISCLAIMER
© 2022. This document has been produced and distributed for members of ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP’s purposes in respect of the GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor (RER Package 3) project only. No part of this document may be reproduced, published, converted, or stored in any data retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the Designers, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING. This document must not be used by the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP (or any of its constituent members) for any other purpose, or provided to, relied upon or used by any other person without ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING’s prior written consent.
All Confidential Information shall remain the sole property of the applicable Sponsor or the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP or ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING and each party shall treat it as confidential. Confidential Information shall not be used by for any purpose other than for performing their respective duties on the GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor (RER Package 3) Project.
This report contains the expression of the opinion of, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING using its professional judgment and reasonable care based on information available and conditions existing at the time of preparation. The use of, or reliance upon this report is subject to the relevant Design Services Agreement between ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING and the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP (the “DSA”) and the following:
This report is to be read in the context of and subject to the terms of the DSA, including any methodologies, procedures, techniques, assumptions and other relevant terms or conditions specified in the DSA. 
This report is meant to be read as a whole, and sections of the report must not be read or relied upon out of context. This report is meant to be used in its unaltered form, as delivered by ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING, and any modifications to the report, or the methodologies, procedures, techniques, assumptions used, without the consent of ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING may invalidate the conclusions, outputs or expressions of opinion, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING does not accept any liability in connection with such altered information; and 
Unless expressly stated otherwise in this report, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING has not verified the accuracy, completeness or validity of any information provided to ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING by or on behalf of the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP and ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING does not accept any liability in connection with such information.


Table of Contents
DISCLAIMER
1.	Introduction	1
1.1	Purpose	1
1.2	GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor	1
2.	Units	2
3.	Abbreviation and Acronyms	3
4.	Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations	4
4.1	Standards, Codes, and Regulations	4
4.2	Stakeholders Standards and Guidelines	6
4.3	References	7
4.4	Definitions	8
5.	Safety Assurance	11
6.	Level of Development	11
7.	Overhead Contact Line Zone (OCLZ) and current collector zone	12
8.	Grounding and Bonding System Design	13
8.1	Hazards and Electromagnetic Interference	13
8.1.1	Direct Contact:	13
8.1.2	Indirect Contact:	14
8.1.3	Lightning:	15
8.1.4	Electromagnetic Interference	15
8.2	Grounding and Bonding Design criteria	15
8.2.1	Step and Touch Voltage	15
8.2.2	Ground Potential Rise (GPR)	16
8.2.3	Rail Potential	16
8.3	Grounding and Bonding Network Configuration	16
8.4	Station and Facilities Grounding and Bonding	18
8.4.1	Electrical Power Supply	18
8.4.2	Communication System	19
8.5	Grounding systems interconnections	20
8.6	Impact of DC Traction Systems	20
8.7	Grounding and Bonding general requirements	21
8.7.1	General	21
8.7.2	Grounding Bus Bars	22
8.7.3	Grounding Conductors and Their Connections	22
8.7.4	Grounding Testing well	23
8.7.5	Accessible connections	24
8.7.6	Identical installation	24
9.	Grounding and Bonding Applications	24
9.1	Traction Power Facilities	24
9.1.1	Grounding and Bonding Configuration at TPF Sites	25
9.1.2	Grounding and Bonding requirements at TPF sites	26
9.1.3	Trackside Grounding to TPF	28
9.2	Passenger Stations	28
9.2.1	New platforms	29
9.2.2	Existing Platform	30
9.3	Corridors	30
9.3.1	OCS Support Structures	30
9.3.2	Track Slab Reinforcement	31
9.3.3	Trenches, Retaining Walls, and Retained Fill Structures	32
9.3.4	Screen, Noise, Wind, and Safety Barriers	32
9.3.5	Fences, gates and not buried metallic pipe	33
9.3.6	Buried metallic pipes	33
9.3.7	Wayside Conductive Structure (outside OCL zone)	34
9.3.8	Third-Party Grounding Interface	34
9.4	Concrete Reinforced Structures	34
9.4.1	Overpass Structures	34
9.4.2	Viaducts/Underpass Structures NTD: Must be updated according to final E&M inputs	37
9.4.3	Concrete Structures	38
9.4.4	Steel Structures	40
9.4.5	Tunnels	40
9.5	Traction Wayside Power Cubicles (TWPC) Require E&M input	41
9.6	Wayside Signaling & Communication Equipment	41
9.6.1	General Requirements	41
9.6.2	Bungalows	41
9.6.3	Control/communication/signaling panels	42
9.6.4	Communication Equipment within Rooms at Stations and Facilities: Telecommunications Bonding Backbone	43
9.7	Grounding for Other Structures	43
9.7.1	Medium Voltage (MV) Substations	43
9.7.2	Hazardous zones	43


List of Tables
Table 1: List of Abbreviations	3
Table 2: Standards, Codes and Regulations	5
Table 3: Stakeholders Standards and Guidelines	6
Table 4: References	7


List of Figures
Figure 1: Go Rail Network	2
Figure 2: Overhead Contact Line Zone and current collector zone (En 50122-1 Figure 1)	12
Figure 3: Minimum distance from direct contact (En 50122-1 Figure 4)	14
Figure 4: General Grounding System Layout	18
Figure 5: Incoming electric feeder at passenger stations	19
Figure 6: Communication server at passenger stations	19
Figure 7: Ground Interconnections at one site (IEC 61000-5-2, Figure 5)	20
Figure 8: Grounding at Traction Power Facilities	26
Figure 9: Typical Substation Trackside Return Current Busbar (TRCB)	28
Figure 10: Grounding Arrangement at Platforms for New Stations	30
Figure 11: Ground arrangement (retrofit) at platforms for existing stations	30
Figure 12: Grounding of OCS Structure.	31
Figure 13: Grounding and Bonding of Track Slab	31
Figure 14: Track slab and viaduct deck reinforcement interconnection	32
Figure 15 – Overpass Bridge	34
Figure 16: Typical Overhead Structure Grounding and Bonding Schematic	35
Figure 17: Grounding and Bonding for road and pedestrian bridges	36
Figure 18: Viaduct	38
Figure 19: Underpass bridge	38
Figure 20: Viaduct Grounding and Bonding	39
Figure 21: Typical Tunnel Grounding and Bonding Layout	40
Figure 22: Typical grounding arrangement at signaling bungalows	42
Figure 23: Typical grounding system for control panels	42

List of Appendices
Appendix A Requirements Allocation for Grounding and Bonding



1.Introduction
1.1Purpose
Metrolinx (Contracting Authority) has engaged the ONxpress Transportation Partners Inc. Joint Venture (ONxpress) to design and build the GO Rail Expansion - On-Corridor Program (OnCorr).
The purpose of this report is to establish the necessary guidelines and specifications for the Grounding and Bonding (G&B) Design for the ON-Corridor GO Expansion project, which will be an essential component of the overall electrification project. The G&B principles apply to all entities involved in the design, construction and testing of the ON-Corridor project, in particular Electrification (E&M), signaling (E&M), civil work (CJV) including existing and new tracks. 
This document provides the basis of Grounding and Bonding design for equipment and structures which will be provided by Civils Joint Venture (CJV) to meet requirements of 
The interfaces with all relevant stakeholders will also be considered. This document is intended for use by the electrical grounding and bonding design team and other design disciplines, as well as any external design consultants engaged to perform design work for the project, whether in direct support or within the scope of external design areas.
The following are the key objectives of the report:
To ensure the electrical safety of all rail system personnel, passengers, and the general public by providing a robust and reliable grounding and bonding system.
To safeguard the integrity of rail operations and maintenance requirements by minimizing the risk of electrical hazards.
To protect equipment, cabling, buildings, and structures from electrical hazards through a well-designed and properly implemented grounding and bonding system.
To ensure compliance with relevant industry standards and regulations for grounding and bonding systems in rail transportation.
To provide guidelines for the selection and placement of grounding and bonding components.
Document the rationale, criteria, principles, assumptions, and constraints used for the detailed design of the project.
Propose integrated design procedures for elements of scope requiring multiple design disciplines.
1.2GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor
GO Transit is a regional transit system that serves the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area, with its hub located at Union Station in Toronto. The GO Transit network operates on a mix of infrastructure owned by Metrolinx and third parties and it’s composed of 8 corridors on which train services operate: Lakeshore West, Milton, Kitchener & UP Express, Barrie, Richmond Hill, Stouffville, and Lakeshore East. In addition, the Union Station area, which is shared by all corridors, is named the Union Station Rail Corridor (USRC). 

Figure 1: Go Rail Network
The GO Rail Expansion program aims to provide faster, more frequent, two-way, all-day service on core segments of the GO rail network. The On-Corridor Works project is a component of the GO Rail Expansion program, which includes plans to electrify the corridors and transition the fleet to electric locomotives. The Traction Power System (TPS) is a railway traction power supply network comprising 6 Traction Power Substations (TPSS), 2 Traction Feeder Facilities (TFF), 4 Switching Stations (SWS), and 6 Paralleling Stations that are expected to be required for the enhanced phase.
This report is part of the Design Development phase and should be read in conjunction with the latest version of the Project Agreement (PA) and other Construction Stage specific Basis of Design reports, as required.
This Basis of Design report is initially focused on the Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works identified by ONxpress as the locations of the early design works priority for CJV and CJV Engineering.
2.Units
All units shall be expressed in the form of International System of Units (SI - Metric) unless required to use an alternative unit system (i.e., United States Customary Units - Imperial) by stakeholders or governing body.
3.Abbreviation and Acronyms
The following abbreviations are commonly used in the Project Agreement, Metrolinx ONxpress, Regulators and other stakeholders’ documentation. Some of the terms used are acronyms developed by ONxpress to organize the work of the RER3 program.
Table 1: List of Abbreviations
Acronym
Meaning
AC
Alternating Current
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
AREMA
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association
ARL
Airport Rail Link
BAR
Barrie – Newmarket GO railway line
CAN
Canadian Standards Association
CDS
Construction Document Development
CEMA
Canadian Electrical Manufacturers’ Association
CENELEC
European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization
CIC
Communications interface cabinet
CJV
Civils Joint Venture
CP
Catenary Poles
CSA
Canadian Standards Association
DC
Direct Current
DDD
Design Development Definition
DDS
Design Development Submission
E&M
Electrical and Mechanical [systems]
EMC
Electromagnetic Compatibility
EMI
Electromagnetic Interference
EPS
Electrification Performance Specifications
ESA
Electrical Safety Authority
HV
High Voltage
Hz
Hertz
G&B
Grounding and Bonding
GB (EB)
Grounding (Earthing) bar
GBHSA
Grounding and Bonding Hazard and Safety Analysis
GO Transit
Government of Ontario Transit
GTA
Greater Toronto Area
GTCS
GO Transit Train Control System
GPR
Ground Potential Rise
IBC
International Building Code
IEC
International Electro-Technical Commission
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IRJ
Insulated Rail Joint
ISO
International Standards Organisation
ITB
Integral Transverse Bond
KIT
Kitchener – Weston-Guelph GO railway line
kV
kilovolt
LSE
Lakeshore East GO railway line
LSW
Lakeshore West GO railway line
LV
Low Voltage
m
meter
MGS
Made Ground System
MIL
Military
mm
millimeter
MV
Medium Voltage
MX
Metrolinx
MX
Metrolinx
NEMA
National Electrical Manufacturers Association
NF
Negative Feeder
NFPA
National Fire Protection Association
NOC
Network Operations Control
OBC
Ontario Building Code
O&M
Operations and Maintenance
OCS
Overhead Contact System
OCLZ
Overhead Contact Line Zone
OESC
Ontario Electrical Safety Code
OHSA
Ontario Occupational Health and Safety Act
PA
Project Agreement
PAS
Public Address System
PIS
Passenger Information System
POS
Power Supply
PS
Paralleling Stations
RCC
Return Current Cubicle
RER
GO Regional Express Rail
RIC
Richmond Hill – Bala GO railway line
rms
root mean square
RTB
Return Traction Bar
SCADA
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SCD
Snow Clearing Device
SWS
Switching Stations
TBD
To Be Determined
TES
Traction Electrification System
TPF
Traction Power Facilities
TPS
Traction Power System
TPSS
Traction Power Substation
TRCB
Trackside Return Current Busbar
TWPC
Traction Wayside Power Cubicles
UL
Underwriters’ Laboratories
USRC
Union Station Rail Corridor
ULC
Underwriters’ Laboratories of Canada
V
Volts
VLD
Voltage Limiting device
4.Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
4.1Standards, Codes, and Regulations
Unless specifically stated otherwise, the design of all electrical grounding and bonding shall be based on the most recent versions of the applicable parts of the following laws or regulations of local authorities, standards, specifications, and other references.
The design shall comply with the requirements of all statutory bodies having jurisdiction over any part of the work including Fire, Building and Local Authorities including, but not limited to those listed in Table 1.
In the event of any discrepancies between different standards, codes, and guidelines, the stricter standards shall take precedence.
Table 2: Standards, Codes and Regulations
Standards Organization
Standards
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
TIA-EIA-607-D - Grounding and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications in Commercial Buildings
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA)
Manual for Railway Engineering, Volume 3 Infrastructure and Passenger, Chapter 33 Electric Energy Utilization
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance- of-Way (AREMA) Communications and Signals Manual of Recommended Practice
Architectural Electromagnetic Shielding Handbook
Architectural Electromagnetic Shielding Handbook, Leland H. Hemming, IEEE Press, 1992 and any revisions
Canadian Standards Association 
(CSA)
CSA- B72– Installation Code for Lightning Protection Systems
CSA-C22.1– Canadian Electrical Code, Part I
CSA- C22.2 NO. 0– General Requirements – Canadian Electrical Code, Part II
CSA-C22.2 No. 41– Grounding and Bonding Equipment
CSA C22.3 No. 3 – Inductive Coordination (Definitions, Principles, and Practices)
CEMA (Canadian Electrical Manufacturers’ Association) Standards
EEMAC (Electrical Equipment Manufacturers’ Association of Canada) Standards
National Building Code of Canada Ontario Building Code (OBC)
Ontario Electrical Safety Code (OESC)
ULC (Underwriters Laboratories of Canada) Standard – S801-10 – Standard on Electric Utility Workplace Electrical Safety for Generation, Transmission and Distribution
Department of Defence (USDOD) Standards
MIL-HDBK-419A, Grounding, Bonding, and Shielding for Electronic Equipment and Facilities (Volume I, Basic Theory, 1987)
MIL Standards: 246431 series
European Standards (EN)
European Standards (EN) EN 50121-1 – Railway applications – Electromagnetic Compatibility
EN 50121-2 - Railway applications - Electromagnetic Compatibility Part 2: Emission of the whole railway system to the outside world
EN 50121-5 - Railway applications - Electromagnetic Compatibility -- Part 5: emission and immunity of fixed power supply installations and apparatus
EN 50122-1 – Protective Provisioning Relating to Electrical Safety and Earthing
EN 50500, Measurement procedures of magnetic field levels generated by electronic and electrical apparatus in the railway environment with respect to human exposure
International Electro-technical Commission (IEC) Standards
IEC 61000-5-2: Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) - Part 5: Installation and Mitigation Guidelines - Section 2: Earthing and Cabling
IEC 60099-4 - Surge Arresters
IEC 60364-1 – Electrical Installations of Buildings
– Part I: Fundamental Principles, Assessment of General Characteristics, Definitions
IEC 60479 - Effects of Current on Human Beings and Livestock – Part 1 General Aspects
Institution of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
IEEE 80 – IEEE Guide for Safety in ac Substation Grounding
IEEE 81 – IEEE Guide for Measuring Earth Resistivity, Ground Impedance, and Earth Surface Potential of a Ground System
IEEE 100 – IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronic Terms
IEEE 142 - IEEE Recommended Practice for Grounding of Industrial and Commercial Power Systems
IEEE 242 – IEEE Recommended Practice for Protection and Coordination of Power Systems
IEEE 367 – IEEE Recommended Practice for Determining the Electric Power Station Ground
Potential Rise and Induced Voltage from a Power Fault
IEEE 518 - IEEE Guide for the Installation of Electrical Equipment to Minimize Electrical Noise Inputs to Controllers from External Sources
IEEE 837 - IEEE Standard for Qualifying Permanent Connections Used in Substation Grounding
IEEE 1100 – IEEE Recommended Practice for Powering and Grounding of Electronic Equipment
IEEE 1143 - IEEE Guide on Shielding Practice for Low Voltage Cables
IEEE C2 – National Electrical Safety Code
IEEE C62 - IEEE Surge Protection Standards Collection
IEEE C62.11 - IEEE Standard for Metal-Oxide Surge Arresters for Alternating Current Power Circuits
IEEE C62.41 - IEEE Recommended Practice for Surge Voltages in Low-Voltage ac Power Circuits
IEEE Std. C95.1 - Standard for Safety Levels with Respect to Human Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields, 3 kHz - 300 GHz
IEEE Std. C95.6 - Standard for Safety Levels with Respect to Human Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields, 0 - 3 kHz
National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA)
250- Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1,000 Volts Maximum)
LA 1 - Surge Arresters
LS 1 - Low Voltage Surge Protection Devices
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
NFPA 70 – National Electrical Code NFPA 101 - Life Safety Code
NFPA 130 – Standard for Fixed Guideway Transit and Passenger Railway Systems
NFPA 780 – Standard for Lightning Protection Systems
Underwriters’ Laboratories (UL)
50 – Enclosures for Electrical Equipment
467- Grounding and Bonding Equipment
4.2Stakeholders Standards and Guidelines
The following general design standards, codes and guidelines are followed or referred to where applicable:
Table 3: Stakeholders Standards and Guidelines
Abbreviation
Name
MX DRM
GO Design Requirements Manual, 2020
-
GO Transit Track Standards RC-0506-02TRK and Go Transit Standard Plans
GTAA BIM Standards and Attachments
GTAA Record Data Submissions
GTTS Section 25- New Track product Process
Metrolinx standards, specifications, guidelines, bulletins and other documents not listed in the table are not considered applicable to the extent of this project scope of work.
4.3References
The geo-engineering design criteria are provided within the program-wide Geo-engineering BoD (Document No. ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001), provided under separate cover. This document includes the design principles and assumptions to be implemented in the approach to geotechnical, hydrogeological, and geo-environmental (excess soils and groundwater) design, as well as pavement and materials design for the program, herein referred to as geo-engineering.
Table 4: References
ID
Code
Document
Version
Issued by

GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor Project: Project Agreement – Part C
Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications
Executed Version
Sponsor

EPS-03000
Electrification Performance Specifications Grounding and Bonding
Final Version 7
Sponsor

RER3-EM-SYS-SPN-ALL-00003
System design and construction rules
P02
E&M

QBS-2014-IEP-002
Go Electrification. Enabling works ET Standards
2016-Rev1
Sponsor

RER3-SVS-PW-5090-SWS-SYS-PLN-0015 
Earth and Bonding Principles
P01
E&M

RER3-SVS-PW-5090-SWS-SYS-PLN-00014 
EB Management Plan
P01
E&M

RER3-SVS-PW-5090-SWS-SYS-PLN-00013
EMC Design & Construction Rules
P01
E&M

RER3-SVS-PW-5090-SWS-SYS-PLN-00012
EMC System Control Plan
P01
E&M

RER3-CJV-PW-0000-SWS-CIV-ICD-00001
ICD CJV / E&M – Overhead Catenary System 

001
CJV

ONC-CJV-5090-SWS-CIV-DES-ICD-00002
Interface Control Document                              Civil Work (CJV) – Traction Power System (E&M)
D01
CJV

RER3-CJV-PW-0000-SWS-CJV-ICD-00005
Interface Control Document (ICD)
 CJV - E&M Grounding and Bonding + Lightning Protection 

P01
E&M

RER3-SVS-PW-5090-SWS-SYS-ICD-00007
ICD E&M: S&TC + COM / CJV: Track Works’
P01
E&M

ONC-CJV-5090-SWS-CIV-DES-ICD-00003
Civil Work (CJV) – Signaling and Train Control System and Communication (E&M)
D01
CJV

RC-506-03SIG-02
Signals and Communications Standards – Codes of Practice
Feb 2021
Sponsor

ISBN 978-1-83953-645-8
Guide to Earthing and Bonding for Electrification Railways
2022
IET
Note: (') - Document Code given during the Pursuit Phase.
4.4Definitions 
Term
Definition
Accessible voltage
That part of the rail under operating conditions which can be bridged by persons, the conductive path being conventionally from hand to both feet through the body or from hand to hand (horizontal distance of 1m to a touchable part).
Aerial Ground Wire
To protect outdoor high-voltage devices from direct lightning strikes, AGW are installed above the 230kV switchyards. 
Bonding
A low impedance path obtained by permanently joining all normally non-current-carrying conductive parts to ensure electrical continuity and having the capacity to conduct safely any current likely to be imposed on it.
Catenary
Mathematical term to describe the shape of a cable sagging under its uniformly distributed weight and used in railroad electrification to describe a system consisting of two or more conductors, hangers and in-span hardware of an overhead contact system, including supports.
Contact Wire
An overhead wire with which the pantograph or other current collector is designed to make contact, also called “trolley wire”.
Corrosion
The chemical or electrochemical reaction of a metal with its environment, resulting in its progressive degradation or destruction.
Counterpoise
A buried wire or a configuration of wires constituting a low resistance grounding system or portion of a grounding system.
Cross Bond
Electrical connection intended to connect in parallel the conductors of the return circuit.
Cross Bond – Rail to Rail
Electrical bond that interconnects the running rails of the same track.
Cross Bond – Track to Track
Electrical bond that interconnects tracks.
Direct Contact
Direct Contact means an electric contact of a person to live parts.
Disconnect Switch
A no-load interrupting type of electrical switch for disconnecting electrical power from a line section.
Electrification System 
An Electrification System consists of 3 major subsystems: Traction Power (TP), Overhead Contact System (OCS) and Grounding and Bonding (G&B). The term “Electrification System” refers to several Electrification sub-systems working together to achieve all the functionality of the “Electrification System.”
Electromagnetic Field (EMF)
The force field that extends outward from any moving electrical current, consisting of both a magnetic field and an electric field.
Electromagnetic Interference
An electrical emission or disturbance that causes degradation in performance or results in malfunctions of electrical or electronic equipment, devices, or systems.
Equipotential Bonding
Provision of electric connections between conductive parts with a view to achieving equipotentiality.
Equipotential Bonding Busbar
Busbar which is a part of an equipotential bonding system, and which enables the electric connection of a number of conductors for Equipotential bonding purposes.
Exposed Conductive Part
A conductive part of equipment that can be touched. It should not be a live part but could become live under fault conditions.
Extraneous Conductive Part
A conductive part liable to introduce a potential, generally ground potential, and not forming part of the electrical installation.
Fault current
Current which flows across a given point of fault resulting from an insulation fault.
Fault Clearing time
Fault clearing is the required time for a protection system to automatically operate circuit breakers to clear a Fault.
Feeder
A current carrying electrical connection between the OCS and a traction power facility (TPSS, SWS, or PS).
 Ground (Earth)
Conductive mass of the earth, the electric potential of which at any point is conventionally taken as zero.
Ground Electrode
A conductor or group of conductors in intimate contact with, and providing an electrical connection to, damp Earth.
Ground Grid
A system of horizontal ground electrodes that consists of a number of interconnected, bare conductors buried in the earth, providing a common ground for electrical devices or metallic structures, usually in one specific location.
Ground Mat
A solid metallic plate or a system of closely spaced bare conductors that are connected to and often placed in shallow depths above a ground grid or elsewhere at the earth’s surface, in order to obtain an extra protective measure minimizing the danger of exposure to high step or touch voltages in a critical operating area or places that are frequently used by people. Grounded metal gratings placed on or above the soil surface, or wire mesh placed directly under the surface material, are common forms of a ground mat.
The ground mat obtains an extra protective measure minimizing the danger of exposure to high step or touch voltages in a critical operating area or places people frequently use.
Ground Potential Rise (GPR)
The maximum electric potential that a grounding grid may attain relative to a distant grounding point assumed to be at the potential of remote earth. The GPR is equal to the maximum grid current times the grid resistance to earth.
Ground Rod
A metal rod driven into the ground with ground wire connection to structures or equipment to disperse currents to ground (earth).
Ground Wire
A conductor installed for providing electrical continuity between a device or equipment and a grounding system.
Grounded
Connected to ground through a ground connection or connections of sufficiently low impedance and having sufficient current-carrying capacity to limit the build-up of voltages to levels below that which may result in undue hazard to persons or to connected equipment.
Grounded System
A system of conductor in which at least one conductor or point is intentionally grounded, either solidly or through a non-interrupting current-limiting device.
Grounding (Earthing)
Grounding protects against the hazard of electric shock by providing a conductive path for fault current to the earth. 
Grounding (Earth) Bar
Terminal or busbar which is part of the grounding arrangement of an installation and which enables the electric connection of a number of conductors for grounding purpose.
Grounding Conductor
A conductor that is used to connect the equipment or the wiring system with a grounding electrode or electrodes.
Grounding Test Well
Grounding Test Well is an access point to underground electrode for easy ground resistance measurement and point to point continuity test. 
Hazard
A physical situation with a potential for human injury.
Impedance Bond
An electrical device located between the rails consisting of a coil with a center tap is used to bridge insulated rail joints in order to prevent track circuit energy from bridging the insulated joint while allowing the traction return current to bypass the insulated joint. The center tap can also be used to provide a connection from the rails to the static wire and/or traction power facilities for the traction return current.
Indirect Contact
Electric contact of persons or animals with exposed conductive parts that have become live under fault conditions.
Integral Transverse Bond
Connections from the static wire to the rails, including the cross- bonds from track to track. They shall be provided at intervals, which shall be compliant with the track circuits operation on one hand and with touch and step voltage on the other hand.
Insulated Rail Joint (IRJ)
A mechanical rail joint which longitudinally separates the rail electrically 
Messenger Wire
The wire from which the contact wire or auxiliary messenger is suspended by means of hangers in a catenary.
Negative Feeder
Negative feeder is an overhead conductor supported on the same structure as the catenary conductors, which is at a voltage of 25 kV with respect to ground but 180 degrees out-of-phase with respect to the voltage on the catenary. Therefore, the voltage between the catenary conductors and the negative feeder is 50 kV nominal.
The negative feeder connects successive feeding points and is connected to one terminal of an autotransformer in the traction power facilities via a circuit breaker or disconnect switch. At these facilities, the other terminal of the autotransformer is connected to a catenary section or sections via circuit breakers or disconnects.
Obstacle
Part preventing unintentional direct contact, but not preventing direct contact by deliberate action.
Overhead Contact Line Zone
Zone whose limits are in general not exceeded by a broken overhead contact line.
Overhead Contact System (OCS)
The system that contains and supports the overhead Contact Wire for distributing power to the rail vehicles.
Pantograph Zone (current Collector Zone)
Zone whose limits are in general not exceeded by an energized pantograph no longer in contact with the contact wire or a broken pantograph and its fragments.
Paralleling Stations (PS)
An installation that helps boost the OCS voltage and reduce the running rail return current by means of the autotransformer feed configuration. The negative feeders (NF) and the catenary conductors are connected to the two outer terminals of the autotransformer winding at this location, with the central terminal connected to the rail return system. OCS sections can be connected in parallel at PS locations.
Phase Break
An arrangement of insulators and grounded or non-energized wires or insulated overlaps, forming a neutral section, which is located between two sections of OCS that are fed from different phases or at different frequencies or voltages, under which a pantograph may pass without shorting or bridging the phases, frequencies, or voltages.
Pole
A mainly vertical structure to provide for support, tensioning and registration of the overhead contact line.
Protective conductor (PE)
A conductor required by some measures for protection against electric shock for electrically connecting any of the following parts: 
exposed conductive parts
extraneous conductive parts
main earthing terminal
earth electrode
earthing point of the source or artificial neutral
Rail Joint Bond
Conductor ensuring the electrical continuity of rails at a joint.
Rail Potential
Rail Potential is defined as the voltage between running rails and ground, occurring under operating conditions when the running rails are utilized for carrying the traction return current, or under fault conditions.
Rail Return
The combination of track structure, jumpers, impedance bonds, grounds, and cables, each of which provides part of the electrical return path from the wheelsets of the traction units to a substation.
Return Cable
Conductor connecting the return rails or other parts of the return circuit to the substation.
Return Circuit
Conducting elements that carry return current from its origin to a substation.
Short-circuit
Accidental or intentional conductive path between two or more conductive parts forcing the electric potential differences between these conductive parts to be equal to or close to zero.
Short-circuit current
The electric current flowing through the short-circuit.
Simultaneous touching distance
The distance which can be bridged by a person.  In general, a minimum horizontal dimension of 2.5 metres.
Static Wire (Aerial Ground Wire)
A wire usually installed aerially adjacent to or above the catenary conductors and negative feeders, that connects OCS supports collectively to ground or to the grounded running rails, to protect people and installations in case of an electrical fault. In an ac electrification system, the static wire forms a part of the traction power return circuit and is connected to the running rails at periodic intervals and to the traction power facility ground grids. If mounted aerially, the static wire may also be used to protect the OCS against lightning strikes. It is sometimes termed “aerial ground wire”.
Step Voltage
The difference in surface potential experienced by a person bridging a distance of 1 metre with the feet, without contacting any ground object.
Stray Current
Part of the current caused by a dc traction system that follows a path other than the return system.
Structure Earth
Construction made of metallic parts or construction including interconnected metallic structural parts, which can be used as an earth electrode.
Switching Stations (SWS)
This is an installation where the supplies from two adjacent TPSS are electrically separated and where electrical energy can be supplied to an adjacent but normally separated electrical section during contingency power supply conditions. It also acts as a paralleling station (PS).
Touch Voltage (Effective)
Voltage between conductive parts when touched simultaneously by a person or an animal.
Note: The value of the effective touch voltage may be appreciably influenced by the impedance of the person or the animal in electric contact with these conductive parts.
Traction Electrification System (TES)
TES is the combination of the traction power system (TPS), the overhead contact system (OCS), and the traction power return system, together with appropriate interfaces to the TES-related supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system. It forms a fully functional 2x25 kV ac traction power supply and distribution system and provides the traction power to the electrically powered vehicles on the Metrolinx electrified railway line.
Traction Power Facilities (TPF)
TPF is a general term that encompasses traction substations (TPSS), switching stations (SWS), and paralleling stations (PS).
Traction Power Return System (Return Circuit)
All conductors including the grounding system for the electrified railway tracks, which form the intended path of the traction, return current from the wheelsets of the traction rolling stock to the traction substations under normal operating conditions and the total return current under fault conditions. The conductors may be of the following types:
1. Running Rails
2. Impedance bonds,
3. Static wires, and buried ground or return conductors,
4. Rail and track bonds,
5. Return cables, including all return circuit bonding and grounding interconnections,
6. Ground, and
7. Because of the configuration of the autotransformer connections, the NF.
Traction Power Substations (TPSS)
TPSS is an electrical installation where power is received at high voltage and transformed to the voltage and characteristics required at the OCS for the nominal 2x25 kV system, containing equipment such as transformers, circuit breakers, and sectionalizing switches. It also includes the incoming high voltage lines from the power supply utility.
Traction Power Supply System (TPS)
TPS is the railway traction distribution network used to provide energy to Metrolinx electric trains, which comprises incoming high voltage supplies, traction power substations (TPSS) at which power is converted from high voltage to nominal 2x25 kV railway traction voltage to the overhead contact system (OCS), other traction switching facilities including switching stations (SWS) and paralleling stations (PS), and connections to the OCS and the traction return and grounding system.
Traction Return Current
The sum of the traction currents returning to the traction substation.
5.Safety Assurance
Safe solutions are part of our core value, thus will be embedded in all design aspects related to the Infrastructure Civil Works. The design process will ensure compliance to applicable codes, regulations, standards, as well as project specific safety requirements.
6.Level of Development
The Level of Development (LOD) is a reference tool intended to improve the quality of communication among users of the Building Information Models (BIMs) about the characteristics of elements in the model. RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-IDD-MTX-00001 is the LOD matrix which has been developed for the project and details the development anticipated at each stage of the design phase (i.e., DDD, DDS, CDS, IFC etc.,).
7.Overhead Contact Line Zone (OCLZ) and current collector zone
These zones are defined by the European Standard EN 50122-1, which establishes limits that are unlikely to be exceeded in general by a broken overhead contact line, damaged energized pantograph, or energized fragments.  See Figure 2. Structures and equipment may accidentally come in contact with a live broken overhead contact line or live parts of a broken or dewired current collector and thereby become live. 
To ensure passengers and personnel safety, it is crucial that normally non-current-carrying metallic components within the OCLZ and current collector zone, such as conduit, cable trays, handrails, and trackside fencing, must be electrically bonded to provide a continuous electrical path and be permanently and effectively grounded or bonded to the static wire. This will provide a path for the electricity to flow to ground and reduce the risk of electrical shock or injury. Additionally, strict adherence to all safety protocols and guidelines when working within the OCLZ is essential to minimize the risk of accidents or injuries. 
Conductive structures outside the OCLZ do not need to be connected to the return circuit.

Figure 2: Overhead Contact Line Zone and current collector zone (En 50122-1 Figure 1)
8.Grounding and Bonding System Design
The grounding network and the traction return current network are closely interconnected to constitute a single composite network. The purpose of this network is to create a grounding system that ensures:
The flow of all the normal and fault currents towards the ground, including fault currents due to lightning strikes through a safe and reliable path.
Equal-potentiality for all normally non-current-carrying conductive equipment and structures.
Safe voltage on all normally non-current-carrying conductive equipment and structures.
8.1Hazards and Electromagnetic Interference
Electrified railway must be designed with required protective considerations to protect people from hazards such as direct and indirect contact with live parts, lightning, and electromagnetic interference.
8.1.1Direct Contact:
The design shall ensure that all persons are safeguarded against potential hazards and injuries that may result from direct contact with live parts of the electrified system. To achieve this, the following measures shall be implemented:
Ensuring that all live parts of the electrified system are properly insulated and protected. This includes the use of appropriate barriers, enclosures, and warning signs to physically separate people from live parts.
Providing adequate training to personnel working in or around the electrified system, to ensure that they are aware of the hazards associated with direct contact and understand how to avoid them.

Figure 3: Minimum distance from direct contact (En 50122-1 Figure 4)
8.1.2Indirect Contact:
Indirect contact refers to situations where a person or animal comes into contact with exposed conductive parts that have become live under fault conditions. The most common examples of indirect contact include:
A broken contact wire falling on conductive parts.
The rail-to-ground potential.
Induced voltage on trackside metallic structures installed parallel to the OCS.
An internal fault in electrical equipment.
To protect against the potential hazards and injuries that may result from indirect contact, the grounding and bonding system should be designed to minimize the risk of injury. To achieve this, the grounding and bonding system should be designed to:
Connect all normally non-current-carrying-conductive parts to ground, either directly or indirectly, to provide a low resistance path for fault current to be dissipated. This is important to ensure that the fault current is quickly and safely directed to the ground, reducing the risk of injury.
Limit the fault current that can pass through a body to a value lower than the shock current. This is crucial to ensure that the current flowing through a person's body is not high enough to cause injury.
Automatically disconnect the power supply within a predetermined time on occurrence of a fault that is likely to cause a current to flow through a body in contact with exposed-conductive parts. This is done to ensure that the current is disconnected as soon as possible, reducing the risk of injury.
8.1.3Lightning:
To ensure the safety and reliability of the facilities and exposed structures, appropriate lightning protection measures shall be implemented based on the incidence of strikes in the area local to each facility.
The facilities and exposed structures shall be grounded in accordance with the recommendations of the equipment manufacturer, as well as industry standards such as OESC, CAN/ULC-801, CAN/CSA – B72 – M87 Installation Code for Lightning Protection Systems, and NFPA 780 - Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems. These standards provide guidance on the design and installation of appropriate grounding and bonding methods.
8.1.4Electromagnetic Interference
Electromagnetic field which is produced by traction power system may induced voltages on wayside metallic structures. If the induced voltage exceeds the safe limits, it may cause electric shock and risk of injuries or death. G&B shall limit the electromagnetic interferences and induced voltage to acceptable limit to prevent any risk for employees, members of public and prevent malfunction of the equipment under both normal and fault conditions.
The involved structures are typically: 
Tunnel and other long structures in in Right-of-way.
Pipework’s (water hydrants etc.), fences and cable trays.
Buried utility infrastructure.
8.2Grounding and Bonding Design criteria
Structures and equipment in OCLZ may accidentally come to indirect contact with a live broken overhead contact line or live parts of a broken or dewired current collector and thereby become live. 
The grounding and bonding system must be designed to protect people from hazards such as indirect contact with live parts, lightning, and electromagnetic interference.
8.2.1Step and Touch Voltage
Step and touch potential at the traction power facilities are critical safety concerns that must be addressed to protect workers and the public from potential electrical hazards. The design of the Grounding and Bonding systems for these facilities shall comply with the requirements of IEEE 80 and OESC. These standards provide guidance on the design and installation of grounding systems to ensure that they are effective in protecting against electrical hazards.
8.2.2Ground Potential Rise (GPR)
The maximum electric potential that a substation grounding grid may attain relative to a distant grounding point assumed to be at the potential of remote earth. The GPR is equal to the maximum grid current times the grid resistance to ground. This rise in potential is caused by the flow of electrical current through the ground and can pose a significant hazard to individuals and equipment. The magnitude of GPR is affected by various factors such as the soil resistivity, the distribution of the electrical current, and the presence of ground conductors. To prevent dangerous levels of GPR, proper design and implementation of grounding systems are necessary. This includes the use of sufficient ground rods, conductor sizing, and effective bonding and grounding practices. It is also important to monitor GPR levels to ensure that they remain within safe limits and to take appropriate corrective action if necessary.
8.2.3Rail Potential
Traction Power Supply and Distribution System design shall ensure that rail voltage do not exceed the safe values under both normal and fault conditions REF _Ref61859745 \n \h  \* MERGEFORMAT . To provide safe touch voltage at the stations, corridors and generally in right-of-way, all the none- current-carrying body of equipment, enclosures, and associated structures, including the Overhead Contact System (OCS), and other trackside equipment, shall be bonded to return circuit.
8.3Grounding and Bonding Network Configuration
To ensure passengers and personnel safety, it is crucial that normally non-current-carrying metallic components within the OCLZ and current collector zone, such as conduit, cable trays, handrails, and trackside fencing, must be electrically bonded to provide a continuous electrical path and be permanently and effectively grounded, if required, and bonded to traction power return circuit by connection to static wires or Impedance bonds. This will provide a path for the electricity to flow to source and reduce the risk of electrical shock or injury by connection to ground. Additionally, strict adherence to all safety protocols and guidelines when working within the OCLZ is essential to minimize the risk of accidents or injuries. 
Conductive structures outside the OCLZ must be grounded according to the local standards but do not need to be connected to the return circuit. REF _Ref61859745 \r \h  \* MERGEFORMAT 
The grounding network consists of:
The body of Ground (earth)
Ground Grids, ground rods and ground wires
The grounded structures
The common buried ground wire (counterpoise) 
Grounding & Bonding interconnections
All the required bonding and connection to return circuits through impedance bonds and static wires.
The non-current carrying components of electrical equipment, including all metallic equipment and structures that may become energized, such as cable trays, building structures and bridge steel structures, also participate in making up the overall ground network with low ground resistance at all locations. 
The following metallic structures (indicative, but not exhaustive list) are to be connected to the grounding network: 
All Metallic cases and masts (where installed):
OCS poles (mast)
Signaling masts and cabinets except point machines
Lineside telephones and casing
Distribution metallic cabinets and boxes
Radio masts
CCTV masts
CCTV cabinets
Cable ladder racks
Lighting poles (mast)
Mechanical turnout mechanical
All metallic components installed in the Tunnel.
All metallic structures/components in the vicinity of the line such as but not limited to:
Metallic parapet and protective canopies of bridges, tunnel heads and footbridges
Metallic shed and platform shelters
Bridge structures (JVC scope of work)
Upper steel capping on concrete bridges/footbridges
Underground metallic pipe along track;, including utility pipes and protective metal casings for utilities, e.g., non-metallic gas pipe crossings with protective metallic casings 
Metallic lighting mast
Cable Trays/ducts
Vent. ducts
Conduits
Sound walls
Fences
Overpass structures if any
Outdoor mounted Transformer structure.
Cable shields and armours
Signaling
Communication
Power supply.
Lightning and surge arrestors.
Exceptions: Certain small conductive structures (less than 2 m long parallel to the tracks) do not need to be connected to the return circuit provided that these structures do not contain or support electrical equipment. The same rule applies to conductive objects which are temporary stored (e.g., a rails stack). These exceptions are in not applicable on the passenger station platform.
Connection between parts of this network is realized through grounding ground bars. This will ensure that the network is able to effectively distribute fault currents and provide a low impedance path to the ground. 

Figure 4: General Grounding System Layout
8.4Station and Facilities Grounding and Bonding
For station buildings, facilities and utilities which are outside of the OCLZ, do not require to meet OCLZ grounding and bonding requirements. These designs shall meet the standard MX/utility design requirements and reference standards.
8.4.1Electrical Power Supply
For station platform and facilities in the OCLZ, power supply shall follow drawing
EW-ET-0115 as indicated in the Figure 5.
Ground bus of power supply is connected to the neutral of main feeder and is connected to platform grounding.
Note: This design is not recommended by E&M and the utility company may be impacted by electric railway. This design must be coordinated with the utility company by E&M. E&M’s recommendation to isolate the neutral at their main panel is to be agreed on. 

Figure 5: Incoming electric feeder at passenger stations
8.4.2Communication System
For station platform and facilities in the OCLZ, power supply shall follow drawing 
EW-ET-0115 as indicated in Figure 6.

Figure 6: Communication server at passenger stations
Ground bus of power supply is connected to the neutral of main feeder and is connected to platform grounding.
Note 1: In some cases, it may not be possible to keep 2m clearances which is asked for communication system such as when this equipment is installed on a metallic pole which is connected to platform grounding (connected to return circuit).
Note 2: Platform grounding cover all the tracks beyond the platform, in some cases, it may not be possible to provide a grounding separate from platform grounding.
It may not be possible to follow this requirements with safe touch voltage.
8.5Grounding systems interconnections
As per IEC 61000-5-2, which covers Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) guidelines for installation and mitigation. It is recommended to interconnect all grounding elements such as lightning rods, foundation rods, and mats, as well as electronic and signal rods as shown in Figure 7. This ensures that all grounding elements are connected together and provide an effective path for electrical current to flow to the ground in case of a fault or surge.
Note: In case local standards don’t let shared ground bus for electrical and communication system, designers shall consider the required provision for potential voltage difference between ground buses of communication system and its power supply.


Figure 7: Ground Interconnections at one site (IEC 61000-5-2, Figure 5)
8.6Impact of DC Traction Systems
The presence of DC traction systems in the vicinity of electrified Metrolinx tracks can have an impact on the safety and integrity of the Traction Electrification System (TES). To minimize the possibility of DC stray current circuit paths through the AC system traction power return circuits, coordination with the DC traction system operator is required. Additionally, track insulation between rails and ground should be enhanced in these areas.
The DC electrified railroad operator must provide the required assurance that the operator shall maintain a high level of insulation between the DC system rails and ground in these sections to minimize the possibility of DC stray currents leaking into the AC traction return system.
In summary, coordination with the DC traction system operator and proper design of the TES, track insulation, grounding, and voltage-limiting devices can help to minimize the impact of DC traction systems on the safety and integrity of the electrified Metrolinx tracks.
8.7Grounding and Bonding general requirements
The grounding and bonding designs must be coordinated with the designs of other disciplines, including civil, architectural, electrical, communication, mechanical, plumbing, traction power supply and distribution, communications, and signaling. The designs must also be coordinated with stray current and corrosion control measures, as well as electromagnetic compatibility and electromagnetic interference requirements, to avoid conflicts and ensure that all systems are effective. 
8.7.1General
The grounding and bonding system shall meet the following requirements to ensure proper functionality and accessibility:
G.R-1.The grounding network should be designed based on the voltage level of the system, the location of the equipment, and the likelihood of a person coming into contact with the equipment. 
G.R-2.The grounding and bonding design should be in compliance with all applicable local, state, and national codes and standards, such as OESC, OSHA and CSA.
G.R-3.Grounding and Bonding shall be designed to meet requirements of section 8.4.
G.R-4.Any connection between the grounding and bonding systems of the TES and utility companies are not suggested. In case this connection is required, design will be coordinated with utility company.
Note: This requirement doesn’t meet requirement of DWG EW-ET-0115. An RFI to Metrolink may be required for deviation from this drawing.
G.R-5.The grounding electrodes shall be contained within the right-of-way confines to ensure that they are easily accessible for inspection and maintenance.
G.R-6.The conduits shall be grounded to the power panel at each end.
G.R-7.All normally non-current-carrying conductive parts of Cable Chambers, handholes, pull boxes, splice boxes; metallic raceways, and cable tray systems shall be bonded and grounded. 
G.R-8.Equipment enclosure doors shall be bonded to their grounded frame with flexible metal bonding straps.
G.R-9.Water, gas or other metallic piping shall not be utilized as a ground electrode or ground conductor to avoid potential electrical hazards and ensure proper grounding and bonding.
G.R-10.Any upgrade or demolitions such as utility isolation, relocations or demolition of existing system shall not affect the electrical safety grounding of Existing Structures and networks.
8.7.2Grounding Bus Bars
G.R-11.To ensure proper grounding and protection of equipment and personnel, grounding bus bars shall be installed in all equipment rooms, pre-engineered enclosures, and other critical spaces such as TPF equipment houses, electrical room, communications rooms, signal houses, and wayside power control cubicles.
G.R-12.Grounding bus bars shall be designed and installed in accordance with National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) standards and shall encircle the room, with the door and door frame connected to the grounding system as per the GO Transit DRM.
G.R-13.The grounding bus bars shall be made of solid copper with minimum cross section of 50mmx6mm and insulated standoffs and shall be drilled with rows of holes for the attachment of bolted compression fittings. Load current, fault current and site requirements must be considered in the design of grounding bus bars.
G.R-14. The grounding bus bars shall be connected to the ground electrodes or ground grids to ensure proper flow of fault current and protection against lightning strikes and other abnormal conditions.
G.R-15.Additional ground bus bars for equipment shall be provided within an auxiliary space to ensure that no potential equipment location is more than 10 metres from the nearest ground busbar.
G.R-16.To ensure proper identification and functionality, the system to which the ground conductors at the ground bus bars are connected shall be clearly marked. 
8.7.3Grounding Conductors and Their Connections
Grounding conductors and their connections shall meet following requirements
G.R-17.Ground conductors and ground rods must be made of copper and shall not corrode excessively during the expected service life.
G.R-18.The color of the insulation jacket of insulated ground conductors shall be green to meet industry standards and allow for easy identification.
G.R-19.All grounding components shall be protected against corrosion.  
G.R-20.Precaution shall be taken at all bi-metallic joints to prevent corrosion. 
G.R-21.The bonding material used in the grounding system shall be capable of sustaining the short-circuit currents for up to the total switch-off (trip) time imposed on the system without thermal degradation or mechanical breakdown. 
G.R-22.The bonding of the equipment and structures to return circuit of traction power system shall be capable of discharging a fault current from the OCS during fault clearing time to ensure that dangerous levels of current do not flow through the system and pose a risk to personnel or equipment.
G.R-23.The equipment bonding shall be evaluated by each sub-system based on the electrical characteristics of the piece of equipment to be grounded, to ensure that the grounding system is adequate for the specific equipment and its intended use.
G.R-24.Prescribed materials, cables, and appurtenances shall be compliant with applicable CSA standards to ensure that they meet safety and performance requirements.
G.R-25.The sizes of grounding and bonding conductors must be selected in accordance with the latest version of applicable codes. 
G.R-26.The grounding connections shall be of galvanized steel tape or stranded copper cable type. They shall be either welded or bolted.
G.R-27. Every grounding connection shall be permanently visible for inspection. 
G.R-28.All the grounding connections to equipment including grounding connections of the cross-bonding boxes, fixing structures, cable glands, cable supports, cable racks and cable fixing materials shall be done in accordance with CSA 22.1.
G.R-29.All connections to the grounding busbar and to its ground rods shall be fitted by adequate copper alloy connectors protected from the corrosion and oxidation by coating by suitable protective material.
G.R-30.The joint shall be protected against corroding welding to steel. The mating surfaces and adjacent areas of all part to be joined shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove oil, grease, paint, dirt, scale, oxide films, conversion coating or any other foreign substance.
G.R-31.Exposed grounding and bonding connections, such as those at equipment, enclosures, ground busbars, and grounding test wells, shall be visible and accessible to ensure that they can be easily inspected and maintained.
G.R-32.Two-hole compression-type termination lugs shall be used to connect bonding conductors to equipment enclosures,
G.R-33.Buried/underground joints in grounding conductors and connections shall be exothermically welded to ensure a secure, long-lasting connection. 
G.R-34.Connections to reinforcement steel shall be exothermically welded. 
8.7.4Grounding Testing well
For maintenance purpose, design must meet following requirements: 
G.R-35.Grounding test well must be incorporated into the design of each ground grid.  Each grounding test well must be connected to the ground grid by at least two grounding conductors.
G.R-36.Grounding test wells must be located so that they are accessible to Operations and Maintenance (O&M) personnel and chosen to minimize the bonding conductor length.
G.R-37.Splices in grounding conductors shall not be permitted to avoid potential electrical hazards.
G.R-38.To protect against physical damage and ensure proper routing, except overhead connections, non-buried grounding conductors shall be installed in conduit, cable tray systems, system-wide cable troughs, or duct bank systems.
8.7.5Accessible connections
For locations that are accessible to the public, the following guidelines shall be followed to ensure safety and security in the grounding and bonding design:
G.R-39.To prevent injury or property damage, anchor bolts and ground lugs shall be installed in a manner that ensures they do not protrude in a hazardous way.
G.R-40.To maintain aesthetics and ensure safety, materials used in the grounding and bonding design should be concealed wherever possible.
G.R-41.To avoid potential hazards, the location of grounding test wells should be avoided in public areas.
G.R-42.To prevent tampering, tamper-proof hardware shall be used to secure all grounding and bonding equipment in public locations.
G.R-43.Proper labeling and signage should be used to clearly mark the location of grounding and bonding equipment in public areas, as well as any warning notices such as "Danger - High Voltage" or "Do Not Touch". This can help prevent accidental injury or interference with the equipment.
8.7.6Identical installation
Where identical installations exist, the following requirements shall apply wherever practicable:
G.R-44.The routing of conduit and conductors between structures and enclosures shall not differ to ensure consistency and ease of maintenance.
G.R-45.Conductor terminations shall be located in a similar manner to ensure consistency and ease of maintenance.
9.Grounding and Bonding Applications
The TES and other non-traction power facility must have suitable electrical grounding system to meet all the relevant standards and requirements of this documents. 
9.1Traction Power Facilities
Traction Power Facilities (TPF) is a general term that encompasses Traction Power Substations (TPSS), Traction Feeder Facilities (TFF), Switching Stations (SWS), and paralleling stations (PS). 
TPF is not includeTraction Wayside Power Cubicle (TWPC)described in ection 9.5.
9.1.1Grounding and Bonding Configuration at TPF Sites
The grounding system of the TPF must comply with IEEE 142, IEEE80 and the CEC to ensure that GPR and step and touch potentials remain within safe limits during normal operation as well as under fault conditions. It is important to consider all relevant local geotechnical data during the design of the grounding system. The grounding system at TPF includes:
A ground grid made up of copper conductors, with appropriate cross section, installed horizontally in a grid pattern below the surface of the TPF site up to 1 m beyond the fences, as shown in Figure 8.To minimize the risk of high step and touch voltages at the ground's surface, the grid should be installed at a shallow depth (usually 30 to 45 mm) below grade, as per the IEEE 80-2020 standard.
Vertical ground rods.
A layer of high resistivity material, such as gravel, should be spread on the ground's surface above the ground grid to increase the contact resistance between the soil and the feet of anyone in the traction power facility. 
In areas where soil resistivity is high or the TPF space is limited, alternative methods, such as connections to remote ground grids or wire mesh, deep-driven ground rods, or drilled ground wells, plus the use of various additives and soil treatment methods, should be considered to obtain low impedance grounding. 
Transferred potentials that can result from interconnection to remote ground grids must be considered and mitigated.
Interconnected steel reinforcement of the foundation slabs and walls, despite the waterproof layer. The thickness of the concrete above reinforcement must be adequate to ensure compliance with step and touch voltages in compliance with IEEE80.
Grounding to all conductive parts within the TPF, both indoor and outdoor, such as casing, steel structure, lightning protection, and metallic fences, must be connected to the ground grid.
The Return Traction Bar (RTB) which will be provided and connected to the ground grid at the TPF by E&M. 
Risers provide connections between the ground grid and ground bars.
Equipotential bars inside buildings or next to transformers.

Figure 8: Grounding at Traction Power Facilities
The main grounding bar should be installed in all main distribution Medium Voltage (MV) or Low Voltage (LV) rooms, where it will serve as the central point for connecting all grounding conductors, protective conductors, and bonding conductors. Additionally, grounding test wells should be placed in easily accessible locations on all main grounding conductors, connecting the grounding terminal, bar, and ground electrode for testing purposes.
9.1.2Grounding and Bonding requirements at TPF sites
An electrical safety analysis must be conducted for TPF where the Ground Potential Rise (GPR), step and touch potential, is a concern (Refer to IEEE Standard 80). This analysis will ensure that touch and step potentials are within permissible limits. G&B design must adhere to the following requirements:
TPF.R-1.The grounding systems of all TPF shall be designed in compliance with the IEEE standards (e.g., 80, 142, and 1100) and CSA/OESC rules as applicable. Additional requirements can be found in section 8.7.
TPF.R-2.Ground grids must be designed to consider future HV network upgrades and its fault current and fault clearing time.
TPF.R-3.The grounding system should be designed so that the GPR, step and touch potentials under fault conditions are within the designated limits. 
TPF.R-4.Ground grids must be constructed from an assembly of driven ground rods and bare conductors. A continuous loop of grounding conductors must surround the perimeter of each facility or building up to minimum one metre beyond the fences.
TPF.R-5.At cross-connections, the conductors must be securely bonded together. 
TPF.R-6.Ground rods must be driven vertically into the ground to a minimum depth specified in CAN/ULC-S801. 
TPF.R-7.Ground rods must be installed at grid corners, junction points along the perimeter, and major equipment locations. 
TPF.R-8.The ground grid must be bonded to the ground rods and the structural steel of the facility structure.
TPF.R-9.All outdoor and indoor conductive parts like concrete reinforcement, equipment casings, steel structures for OCL and equipment support, guard cables and equipment for lightning (if any) protection, metal sheath of cables, lighting poles, doors…) shall be connected to the grid. 
TPF.R-10.It shall be possible to disconnect the ground grid from foundations’ rebars to measure its ground resistance easily and independently.
TPF.R-11.Ground grid and High Voltage equipment bonding in TPSSs shall be capable of discharging a fault current from the HV network during fault clearing time to ensure that dangerous levels of current do not flow through the system and pose a risk to personnel or equipment.
TPF.R-12.Ground grid locations shall be coordinated with landscaping plans to avoid conflicts with tree roots, as well as underground utilities and sewer installations to avoid any direct electrical connection to these systems.
TPF.R-13.The perimeter fence and gates shall be effectively bonded with the grounding loop at frequent intervals, and within this loop, the conductors must be laid in the form of a grid.
TPF.R-14.Bare metallic parts of the fence coated with insulating material need not be grounded (as long as the coating is guaranteed for the lifetime of the project).  
TPF.R-15.All physical breaks in the fencing surrounding a substation installation shall be bonded in such a way as to ensure that dangerous potentials do not arise between the parts of the fence (as specified by IEEE 80).
TPF.R-16.Backup calculations shall be provided to prove that the grounding system design ensures the touch and step potentials and GPR are less than the safe levels which are requested in IEE80 and CSA 22.1. 
TPF.R-17.Each TPF must be equipped with appropriate lightning protection measures, selected according to the incidence of lightning strikes in the area local to each TPF. 
9.1.3Trackside Grounding to TPF 
The running rails and the static wire form the traction return current path to the TPFs. The grounded OCS structure, as described in section 9.3.1, in which the traction return current path connects at regular intervals, provides the trackside grounding Figure 9. Traction Return Current Busbar (TRCB) is required at every TPF location but there is not any requirement for connection to ground as indicated in Figure 9.

Figure 9: Typical Substation Trackside Return Current Busbar (TRCB)
9.2Passenger Stations
Stations and platforms only receive LV and should not receive MV. 
Station G&B is comprised of interconnected G&B at platform and track level.  This design shall provide safe step and touch voltages on the platform under both normal and fault conditions. 
An electrical safety analysis must be conducted to confirm rail voltage will be less than safe values under normal and fault conditions (please see section 8.2.3 for more details). All the metallic equipment on the platform will be bonded together and grounded and finally bonded to return circuit to provide safe touch voltage for public and employees.
Grounding and bonding in the stations must meet following requirements:
PS.R-1.A counterpoise (stranded bare copper conductor) or ground grid shall be installed along the entire length of each platform, with 4/0 copper conductor buried in ground and extending a minimum of 15 metres beyond the ends of the platform. 
PS.R-2.The counterpoise/ground grid shall be connected to the rails via an impedance bond at one end of platform only, with the location coordinated with the signal system design, 
PS.R-3.The platform reinforcement-bonded metallic items shall be isolated from the facility and utility grounds.
PS.R-4.Regardless of OCLZ, all the non-current-carrying metallic structures and miscellaneous items on the platform edge, such as platform reinforcement steel, OCS poles, stairways, platform shelters, benches, garbage cans, doors, elevators, etc., shall be isolated from the static wire and bonded to platform grounding. 
Note-1.The station building equipment fed by the city energy provider are bonded to separate grounding system independent from platform grounding system.
Note-2.A minimum distance of 2.5 metres will be required between grounded equipment on the platform and grounded building equipment which are connected to separate grounding system.
Note-3.The manhole covers on the platform do not need to be bonded to the counterpoise.
PS.R-5.The facility electrical system shall utilize insulated cable grounding connections to the electric utility supply point. 
PS.R-6.The resistance to ground shall not exceed 5 ohms. Subject to field-testing during construction, it may be necessary to install supplemental ground rods outside the limits of the platform that can be attached to the platform grounding system to satisfy the touch voltage requirements.
PS.R-7.Utilities (gas, water…) entering the station must be electrically isolated at the station perimeter.
PS.R-8.Metallic structures (canopies, fences…). Fences shall be made dis-continuous every 30 meters.
9.2.1New platforms
G&B design for the new platform will use drawings EW-ET-0107, 0108, 0110 and 0106 as reference which are simplified in Figure 10 and must meet the following requirements:
PS.R-9.To minimize potentials between the station platform and the vehicles, the platform reinforcement shall be electrically interconnected and shall be connected to counter poise/ground grid.
PS.R-10.To provide an equipotential surface, the top layer of reinforced concrete platforms must be made continuous through exothermic welding on all longitudinal bars along the length of the platform, and between longitudinal and transverse bars at least every 15 m and with counterpoise wire embedded in the platform and connected to rebar every 15 m, as shown in Figure 10.
If the platform is constructed using pre-cast panels: 
PS.R-11.Design shall follow the principles of new platforms unless they are not equipped with rebars that follow the principles for existing platforms.
PS.R-12.Grounding plates shall be used to provide the means for interconnecting the reinforcement in the panels and for attachment of the impedance bond. 

Figure 10: Grounding Arrangement at Platforms for New Stations
9.2.2Existing Platform
For existing platform, a survey will be necessary to determine the best method for grounding. One possible method for grounding in an existing retrofitting station is shown in drawings EW-ET-0103, 0104, 0105 and 0106 and simplified in Figure 11, where a buried counterpoise (strand bare copper conductor) will be laid at track level, along the platform length and extend 15 m on both sides. If accessible, the steel mesh must be connected to grounding system. The method of retrofitting the existing station's G&B system will be determined during the design phase, based on the layout of the existing station. 

Figure 11: Ground arrangement (retrofit) at platforms for existing stations
9.3Corridors
If located within the OCL zone, the metallic equipment and structures, as mentioned in section 8.3 shall be bonded to the traction return circuit.
9.3.1OCS Support Structures
OCS poles will be grounded via their foundations with a 4/0 AWG copper cable (or equivalent in aluminum) and shall meet following requirements:
OCS.R-1.OCS foundation may be used as a part of OCS pole groundings.
OCS.R-2.The maximum ground resistance value for OCS poles is 25 Ω.
OCS.R-3.OCS poles with surge arrester must not have a ground resistance value higher than 5 Ω.
OCS.R-4.If the ground resistance of individual OCS poles exceeds the specified values, individual ground rods or other solutions should be applied.
OCS.R-5.Except in the station, the OCS poles should be bonded to the static wire to keep the ground resistance low.
OCS.R-6.In the areas where portal OCS structure are used, all the components shall be bonded together and OCS poles shall be bonded to platform grounding at one side.

Figure 12: Grounding of OCS Structure.
9.3.2Track Slab Reinforcement 
The track slab reinforcement must be properly connected in both the longitudinal and transverse directions to form a uniform network, which will then be electrically bonded to the static wire or through impedance bonds, as shown in Figure 13 and Figure 14.

Figure 13: Grounding and Bonding of Track Slab

Figure 14: Track slab and viaduct deck reinforcement interconnection
9.3.3Trenches, Retaining Walls, and Retained Fill Structures
The reinforcement steel in new trench walls must be electrically connected to the reinforcement steel of the base slab, and subsequent trench segments must be connected together to ensure electrical continuity. Similarly, the reinforcement steel in retaining walls or retained fill structures must be connected to the reinforcement steel of the footing and subsequent segments must be interconnected to ensure electrical continuity. 
To ensure proper grounding of the track slab, grounding plates must be installed in the face of the walkway and electrically connected to the structure reinforcement. Grounding plates, bonded to the reinforcing steel, must be provided at no more than 3 metres from each end of, and in each niche/recess in, trench and retaining wall structures, and at intervals not exceeding 100 metres for all structure types. 
For existing trenches, along-track counterpoises must be laid in place of interconnecting reinforcement bars. All other details are similar to those for new trenches described above.
9.3.4Screen, Noise, Wind, and Safety Barriers
The reinforcement steel of screen, noise, wind, and safety barriers shall be electrically connected to the reinforcement steel of the associated structure (e.g., aerial structure, trench). 
Safety barriers shall be electrically bonded to the static wire at not fewer than two locations to provide an effective ground connection. This is especially important for safety barriers, as they are designed to protect people and property from potential hazards.
Metrolinx and third-party advertising signboards within the Metrolinx right-of-way shall also be bonded to the static wire at not fewer than two locations. 
It is important to note that the concerned third party shall be responsible for grounding of its advertising signboards outside the Metrolinx right-of-way. This ensures that the ground connection is properly maintained, and that the signboards continue to function safely and effectively.
9.3.5Fences, gates and not buried metallic pipe
The design for metallic fences and gates, including level crossing gates, pedestrian crossings, and inter-track fences that lie within the OCLZ, shall include evaluations of touch voltages and the installation of appropriate safety measures. Ground electrodes shall be installed on either side of gates or other openings in the fence, and fence posts at openings shall be bonded to form a continuous electrical path. Gates shall be bonded to support posts using flexible metal bonding straps to ensure electrical continuity is not reliant on hinges.
Fences shall be made electrically continuous and grounding conductors shall be bonded to fence posts and to any fence material support members (top and bottom) between posts. Metallic fences within the OCLZ shall be electrically bonded to the static wire and segmented at intervals to ensure touch voltages do not exceed the limits specified in the below requirements.
For fences and gates located outside the OCLZ, up to a distance of 10 metres from the outermost rail of the electrified tracks, per Canadian Standards CAN/CSA-C22.3 No.8-M91, the fencing shall be bonded to form a continuous electrical path. However, these fences and gates will not be bonded to the static wire. Ground electrodes shall be installed based on local soil resistivity and worst-case projected potentials, and grounding conductors shall be exothermically welded to fence posts and driven ground electrodes to meet the requirements of OESC.
FR-1.Conductive structures located within the OCL zone shall be bonded to the static wire.
FR-2.Fences/metallic pipes must have a longitudinal electric continuity between panels/sections, including possible continuity interruption (gates etc.,). 
FR-3.Conductive parts that are to be bonded to the static wire do not need to be bonded individually but can be bonded together in series.
FR-4.Structures (if shorter than 50 metres) shall be bonded to the static wire at one point only (preferably at the middle). If the structure is longer than 50m, it shall be bonded at both ends and at least at every 1000 metres. Note: this is different from MX requirement.
FR-5.If the structure leaves the OCL zone, it should be isolated from return circuit, then it shall be bonded to the separate grounding system at leaving Isolation panel/section should be long enough to prevent access to both metallic pats at the same time.
FR-6.Bonding connections shall be as short as possible.
FR-7.Steel reinforced concrete walls shall be bonded in the same way as walls of cuts and covers.
FR-8.Noise protection walls shall follow either the rules for fences or reinforced concrete walls depending on their construction.
9.3.6Buried metallic pipes
Buried assets (typically services pipes, such as municipal distribution (water, sewer, storm, drain, culvert), gas distribution, and pipelines.) that are under cathodic protection may be subject to impermissible induced voltages from the OCS. Adequate measures (e.g., by implementation of voltage limiting device) shall be adopted to mitigate electrical shocks depending on the influence and the arrangement of the asset. Cable Chambers should be installed to access these buried assets.
FR-9.Non insulated buried pipes do not need any protection and shall be grounded as per the utility owner’s recommendation.
FR-10.Depending on the parallelism length with the railway system, insulated pipes need to be grounded at one or several points. If the pipe leaves the OCL zone, it does not need to be grounded after an insulated joint be inserted.
FR-11.Cathodic protected pipes need a case per case survey in order not to compromise their cathodic protection.
9.3.7Wayside Conductive Structure (outside OCL zone)
Conductive structures outside the OCL zone do not need to be connected to the return circuit. However, conductive parts which are liable to become live due to inductive or capacitive coupling with the voltage of the contact line shall be connected to ground if not directly connected to the return circuit. A dedicated study will be done during design phase on a band of 30m from the external tracks at each side to evaluate and protect people and equipment from induced voltages. Grounding via the foundations is usually sufficient, as long as no intentional joints are inserted.
9.3.8Third-Party Grounding Interface
To prevent the danger of voltage propagation, third-party grounding installations near the Metrolinx right-of-way shall not be connected to the railway grounding system. Instead, non-conducting materials shall be used for pipe work, or an insulating segment shall be inserted at the site boundary. If separation of the public network grounding system is not possible due to lack of space, the traction power return circuit shall be interconnected with the neighboring grounding system of the public network.
9.4Concrete Reinforced Structures
9.4.1Overpass Structures
Overpass structure is a structure that crosses over a railway.

Figure 15 – Overpass Bridge
All the metallic equipment and components, parapets, staircases, road crash fence, handrails, security fences, of the bridge must be bonded together and bonded to return circuit by connection to SW.
For concrete reinforced road or pedestrian bridges, If components of the overpasses fall within the overhead contact line and pantograph zone.
Flash plates will be necessary for safe operation of the system. The flash plates should be attached to the underside of the structure and connected to the static wire. 
Parapet may be required to protect public from access to the live conductors.
A typical generic overhead structure grounding and bonding schematic is shown in Figure 16 and Figure 17.

Figure 16: Typical Overhead Structure Grounding and Bonding Schematic

Figure 17: Grounding and Bonding for road and pedestrian bridges
Grounding and Bonding design for over pass structures must meet below requirements:
S.R-1.The grounding detailed design of bridge shall be coordinated with its structure design. 
S.R-2.The metallic reinforcement of concrete bridge structures must be bonded all along their length via a bare conductor to both the static wire and the structure earth (if accessible for existing bridges). This includes road crash fences, handrails, staircases, and security fences located within the step and touch potential limit. 
S.R-3.Fences must meet requirements of section 9.3.5.
S.R-4.The electrical continuity structure and continuity between the grounding plates on each beam shall be verified prior to any further connections being made. 
S.R-5.Any metallic structure within 2.25 metres (shortest distance) from the traction live conductor shall be connected to the G&B system. This requirement takes precedence over the pantograph and OCL zone distances.
S.R-6.At each 100-metre meter interval and on each pole, accessible grounding plates should be available for ensuring connection with the rail. 
S.R-7.At bridge expansion joints levels, the length of the bond must be long enough to follow the movement of the structure.
S.R-8.For steel bridges, steel structures should be interconnected and bonded to the static wire at a minimum of two locations.
S.R-9.The ground resistance, measured at ground plates plate of each column, prior to any further connections, shall meet requirements which are provided for OCS poles. If the resistance is greater than the required value, additional grounding measures should be installed to achieve this value.
S.R-10.Flash plates shall be anchored to underneath the deck and above each live wire (contact line and feeder), with a width of:
305 mm when the vertical clearance between the deck bottom and the live wire is less than 450 mm.
610 mm when the clearance is between 450 mm and 915 mm. No flash plate is required when the clearance is superior to 910 mm.
S.R-11.The flash plates shall be installed all along the structure covering the catenary system. Should flash plates be interrupted electrically in the longitudinal direction, they must be interconnected by an AWG 4/0 bare or insulated copper conductor.
S.R-12.These flash plates shall be bonded to the counterpoise bonding all panels of the parapets. See next section.
Note-1.Flash plates are not necessary for steel (only) structures.
Note-2.Flash plates may be replaced by a fully interconnected metallic structure as defined for station platform within the deck of the overpass structure. This structure shall then be accessible at the 4 corners of the overpass and bonded to the static wire.
S.R-13.Metallic parapets (obstacles), fences and similar structures shall be bonded all along their length via a bare counterpoise to both SWs. 
For cut and cover over pass structures:
S.R-14.If the reinforced walls are located within the OCLZ, the concrete reinforcement (one bar every 1m in height) shall be continuously bonded in the longitudinal direction. 
S.R-15.Frameworks shall be provided with regular accessible grounding points. The structure earth will be bonded to the static wire every 200m at each side of the structure.
9.4.2Viaducts/Underpass Structures NTD: Must be updated according to final E&M inputs
Viaduct is an elevated structure that consists of a series of arches, piers or columns supporting a long-elevated railway. See Figure 18.

Figure 18: Viaduct
Underpass is a road or pedestrian tunnel passing under another road or a railroad. See Figure 19.

Figure 19: Underpass bridge
9.4.3Concrete Structures
There is not specific requirement for the structures with ballasted track.
For new viaducts/underpass bridges with non-ballasted track CJV is constructing, the viaduct shall meet the following requirements:
S.R-16.Piers are grounded through their foundations (piles or equivalent).
S.R-17.Along each pier, at least two dedicated rebars (16mm minimum) belonging to the pier shall be fillet welded to the pile reinforcement (for piers mounted on one pile only). The bonding arrangement is to be defined according to the foundation concept, especially if the foundations consist of several piles and where a bonding concept may be adopted.
S.R-18.The dedicated bars are also fillet welded to the next bars up to the top of the pier, where they are welded to two ground plates.
S.R-19.A jumper from the column should relate to an exothermic weld to a surface-mounted grounding plate near the top and bottom of the column, as well as on both sides of the column. 
S.R-20.Only one plate is required when the upper plate is 2 metres or less above finished grade at the column. 
S.R-21.For existing concrete aerial structures, separate counterpoise(s) should be laid on the deck at the time of electrification. These counterpoises should be connected to the ground through vertical ground conductors running on the columns. A counterpoise is required because reinforcement steel bars cannot be interconnected after the concrete structures have been laid. 
S.R-22.The static wire and all other system elements should be connected to the counterpoise through ground plates. 

Figure 20: Viaduct Grounding and Bonding
9.4.4Steel Structures
The steel bridge girders must be interconnected at the “fixed ends” with exothermically welded flexible bonds, which must be connected to the reinforcement steel (within the bridge piers or abutments) at two grounding plates, each with a ground resistance of 25 ohms or less. To provide electrical continuity at the “sliding end’, the two outer girders must each be connected by an exothermically welded flexible jumper (of sufficient length to allow for expansion and contraction of the girders) to a grounding plate that is connected to the reinforcement steel (within the bridge pier or abutment). Where non-ballasted track is installed on the steel support structures, flexible jumpers must be exothermically welded between the track slab grounding plates and the steel support girders.
9.4.5Tunnels
Grounding and Bonding design for tunnel must meet below requirements:
New tunnels must have a continues rebar at each side of the tunnel. 
Any additional required ground conductors shall be laid at a low level, adjacent to the track or along the outer edges of the walkways, so that these conductors can supplement the grounding capability of the system and enhance fault detection and control in the event of a broken wire condition. 
Frameworks shall be provided with ground plate at every 100 metres.
Wayside metallic structures shall be grounded with a minimum 2/0 ground conductor. 
To facilitate grounding of the track slab, grounding plates, electrically interconnected to the structure reinforcement, shall be installed in the face of the walkway. 
Where the tunnel structure design includes cross passages, emergency shafts, or other ancillary spaces, the ground conductor shall be extended into these spaces. The ground conductors shall be located to avoid accidental contact by personnel.
The Figure 21 shows the general configuration of grounding system in the tunnel. 

Figure 21: Typical Tunnel Grounding and Bonding Layout
9.5Traction Wayside Power Cubicles (TWPC) Require E&M input
Traction Wayside Power Cubicles (TWPC) are electrical substations that supply power to the trains' traction systems and other onboard systems. Proper grounding of these systems is necessary to protect the equipment and personnel from electrical hazards, such as lightning strikes and power surges.
Traction Wayside Power Cubicles (TWPC) shall be grounded by separately driven ground rods at opposite corners, as indicated in Figure 23, and connected to grounding pads integral with the cubicle. Compression-type terminal lugs shall be used to connect grounding conductors to equipment enclosures. These enclosures shall not be interconnected with the TES grounding and bonding system. 
9.6Wayside Signaling & Communication Equipment
9.6.1General Requirements
The design of the grounding system be verified to provide suitable ground resistance for all equipment it serves.  
9.6.2Bungalows
Grounding systems at the bungalows shall consist of at least four ground rods, placed at the corners of the bungalow. The ground rods shall be bonded together and have two grounding conductors bonded to the structure and connected to ground terminals.
The buried grounding system of bungalows shall follow principles of MX standards, with a maximum value of 1 Ohm.

Figure 22: Typical grounding arrangement at signaling bungalows
9.6.3Control/communication/signaling panels
Grounding of outdoor wayside signaling panels and equipment (signal posts, radio mass…) shall mainly be achieved according to MX standards in terms of grounding architecture with maximum ground resistance of 1 Ω. 

Figure 23: Typical grounding system for control panels

9.6.4Communication Equipment within Rooms at Stations and Facilities: Telecommunications Bonding Backbone
Communications rooms shall have grounding busbars encircling the room and connected together, the route and cable size of the connections shall be planned to minimize length and eliminate splices. In steel building structures, the telecommunications grounding system shall be bonded to the structural steel. The ground resistance between the structural steel and the AC grounding electrode system shall be compliant with IEEE Std. 142. The communications grounding system in each room shall be bonded to the busbar in each communications room and communications closet. In communications rooms and closets, the busbar shall be bonded to the AC grounding electrode and the nearest busbar.
9.7Grounding for Other Structures
9.7.1Medium Voltage (MV) Substations
The medium voltage substations refer to the substations in stations and other facilities which are fed by local electric utility companies. The grounding and bonding for MV substations shall comply with the local utility standards in addition to applicable standards referenced in section 4.3. 
MV.R-1.The MV substations shall have a meshed ground grid comprising of 4/0 ground conductors sized to ensure safe GPR, step and touch voltages considering the magnitude of fault currents at each respective site. 
MV.R-2.The ground grid shall extend one metre beyond the fence line, including one metre beyond the maximum swing of the gate. The ground rods shall be installed at the corners and at regular intervals of the fencing grounding. 
MV.R-3.The grounding loop shall be installed 1m from the footing of the above ground structure. The structure rebar shall be connected to the grounding system at the corners. The ground rods shall be placed at the corners of the loop.
MV.R-4.The surge protection shall be provided for all incoming MV cable or overhead lines. The ground rods shall be installed near the surge arresters. 
MV.R-5.All non-current carrying metallic enclosures or parts of AC electrical equipment shall be connected to the ground grid.
MV.R-6.A layer of high resistivity of gravel with resistivity of at least 3000 Ohm-m and thickness of 150mm shall be spread for the entire surface, except access road and at least 1.5 metres beyond the fence.  
For MV systems located within and close to a station building, the MV system grounding system shall be integrated within the Station grounding system.
9.7.2Hazardous zones
Existing fueling tanks are installed in at least two maintenance facilities. Should the involved tracks be electrified, mitigation measures must be taken to avoid explosions due to flow of current for all refueling equipment within OCLZ:
H.R-1.The involved tracks must be cross-bonded every 70 metres minimum as well as to the neighboring tracks and to adjacent metallic installations, up to the next turnouts.
H.R-2.The fueling nozzle must be bonded to the track during refueling operation, and insulated from ground.
H.R-3.The OCS must be de-energized during fueling.
H.R-4.A common pipework inside the overhead contact line zone or current collector zone feeding several filling nozzles shall be insulated between each filling nozzle.
H.R-5.Each conductive part which is connected to the return circuit shall not have any additional connections to ground.
H.R-6.Conductive pipework carrying explosive liquids or gases leaving the contact line or current collector zone shall be insulated outside of the OCL zone. The insulating joint shall withstand the voltage of the contact line.


Appendix A
Requirements Allocation for
Grounding and Bonding



Source module
Num Heading
Primary Text
Artifact Type
Applicable section(s) &
Basis of Design Document Number
Engineering Lead Comments
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.9.6
Project Co shall submit the Code Compliance Report in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Requirement
NA
This requirement will be met during design and construction stages. References, code and standards are provided in the section 2 of this document.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.1.3
(a) For Section C.14 – Union Station of this Schedule C-6, unless the context requires otherwise, the direction “north” should be interpreted as the direction perpendicular to the 1929 Retaining Wall and facing the Union Station Headhouse with all other cardinal directions in this Schedule C-6 being derived from this interpretation of the direction north.
Requirement
NA
This requirement direction for the design and construction and will be considered in these stages.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.4 (c)
(vii)  Underground electrical ducting and wiring shall be provided in compliance with Municipal Standards.
Requirement
NA
It is not G&B requirement
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.3 (a)
(a) Project Co shall develop and implement nomenclature (“Nomenclature”) as a means of identifying, labeling and tracking equipment and assets to comply with this Schedule C-6 and Part B-3 –Fixed Asset Maintenance. The Nomenclature shall adhere to the defined terms under the Project Agreement to the extent applicable and shall be developed to allow for easy identification of System and Facility elements to support operational decisions, maintenance activities, and alarm management.
Requirement
NA
This requirement direction for the design and construction and will be considered in these stages..
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.1 (k)
(viii) with respect to grounding and lighting protection:
Requirement
whole the report. 
For lightning protection sections 3.4
Requirement GR-13, TPF.R-9, TPF.R.17

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.1 (k)
(viii) A. grounding and bonding schematic diagram (DWG);
Requirement
Figure 4
Section C.1.1 (k) refers to submittals for design and construction. Figure 4 provides the base for future submittals. More details will be provided at the design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.1 (k)
(viii) B. ground resistance/resistivity study and Step and touch potential study;
Requirement
Section 4 provide the base for the required study in this requirement
Section C.1.1 refers to submittals for design and construction. Section 4 provides the base for future submittals. More details will be provided at the design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.1 (k)
(viii) D. grounding and bonding layouts, references to applicable details (DWG);
Requirement
Section 4 provide the base for the required study in this requirement
Section C.1.1 refers to submittals for design and construction. Section 4 provides the base for future submittals. These details will be provided at the design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.1 (k)
(viii) E. grounding grid layouts (DWG);
Requirement
Section 4 provide the base for the required study in this requirement
Section C.1.1 refers to submittals for design and construction. Section 4 provides the base for future submittals. These details will be provided at the design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.1 (k)
(viii) F. ground-bus bar in electrical and communication rooms, including location and sizes;
Requirement
Section 3.4 provide the base for the required study in this requirement
Section C.1.1 refers to submittals for design and construction. Section 3.4 provides the base for future submittals. These details will be provided at the design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.1 (k)
(viii) G. grounding and bonding equipment and details;
Requirement
General direction for the grounding is provided in the section 4.
Section C.1.1 refers to submittals for design and construction. Section 4 provides the base for future submittals. These details will be provided at the design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
 (i) C. xiii. grounding system;
Requirement
General configuration and direction for the grounding is provided in the sections 3 and  4.
Details will be provided at the design stage.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
 (i) P. i. for power transformers with medium voltage secondary, Project Co shall provide low-resistance grounding system to allow satisfactory operation of a fully coordinated protection system while limiting ground fault current to reduce arc-flash hazards, and equipment mechanical damage;
Requirement
Section 4.1 and 4.7.1
Details will be provided at the design stage.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
 (i) P. ii. for building service loads such as lighting, HVAC, and general power on 600/347V, 3-phase or 208/120V, 3-phase, Project Co shall provide solid grounding system to allow satisfactory operation of a fully coordinated protection system and in some cases present of line-to-neutral loads;
Requirement
Section 3.4
Details will be provided at the design stage.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
 (i) P. iii. Project Co shall provide standby diesel generators on 600V, 3-phase with solid grounding system.
Requirement
Section 3.4
Details will be provided at the design stage.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
 (i) R. i. 6. substation grounding study.
Requirement
sections 4.1 and 4.7.1
Studies will be provided at the design stage when the input data are available.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
(ii) A. Project Co shall provide a fully coordinated and integrated grounding system including substation grounding, communication system grounding, and lightning protection grounding for the entire Site.
Requirement
Base is provided in the section 4 and figure 4.
Details will be provided at the design stage.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
(ii) B. Project Co shall provide a clean ground grounding system with single point ground to main electrical system ground for communication equipment grounding in order to minimize AC power line frequency interference.
Requirement
Section 3.4
This requirement doesn't meet safe touch voltage, deviation from this requirement may be required
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
(ii) C. Project Co shall provide a separate ground electrode for lightning protection system grounding to reduce or eliminate the adverse effects of high energy lightning strikes on electrical and communication systems. Project Co shall separate the grounding electrodes by spacing but maintain continuity by means of a buried copper conductor to achieve a common grounding.
Requirement
Sections 3.4 and 3.5
This requirement does not meet reference standards. Grounding system will be an interconnected system under ground. Electrical system, communication system and lightening arresters will have separate risers and ground buses.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.1.5 (f)
(ii) D. Project Co shall provide the grounding system in compliance with the results of the Ground Potential Rise Study.
Requirement
sections 4.1 and 4.7.1
Studies will be provided at the design stage when the input data are available.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.1 (c)
(v) D. xvi. electrical code grounding and bonding details;
Requirement
Base of the design is provided in this document
section C.14.1. c refers to constructional documents. This information will be provided at design and construction stages.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.1 (c)
(v) E. vii. ground potential rise study in coordination with the Electrification submittals;
Requirement
Base of the study is provided in this document
section C.14.1. c refers to constructional documents. This information will be provided at design and construction stages.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.5 (b)
(i) A. i. provide the Initial Works such that utility isolation or relocations do not affect the electrical safety grounding of Existing Structures;
Requirement
GR-10
More details will be provided at the design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (b)
(iii) E. ii. 6. have two-hole long barrel compression lugs with inspection/viewing windows for the main feeder and ground cable terminations;
Requirement
NA
This document provide base of thee design for grounding and bonding; equipment specification will be provided at the detail design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (b)
(iii) E. ii. 7. have a copper ground bus extending the full width of the cubicles and located at the bottom of the switchboards;
Requirement
NA
This document provides base of the design for grounding and bonding, equipment specification will be provided at the detail design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (b)
(iii) F. i. 17. provide grounding bus bars with connection to bonding conductors;
Requirement
NA
This document provide base of thee design for grounding and bonding; equipment specification will be provided at the detail design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (b)
(vi) A. ii. provide green insulated bonding conductors;
Requirement
G.R-17

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (b)
(vi) A. iii. provide a minimum of one bonding conductor for each three ungrounded conductors in all conduit and cable runs;
Requirement
NA
This document provides base of the design for grounding and bonding, cable installation specification will be provided at the detail design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (b)
(vi) A. iv. provide separate bonding conductors for each ground fault circuit interrupter circuit;
Requirement
NA
This document provides base of the design for grounding and bonding, cable installation specification will be provided at the detail design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (b)
(vi) D.i. with three bare bonding copper conductors sized to Table #16 of the OESC; and
Requirement
NA
This document provide base of thee design for grounding and bonding; equipment specification will be provided at the detail design stage
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (i)
(iv) E. ground potential rise study.
Requirement
sections 4.1 and 4.7.1
Studies will be provided at the design stage when the input data are available.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (o)
(i) Project Co shall provide a 50 mm wide by 6 mm thick grounding copper bus bar encircling each electrical room and communication hub room constructed or modified as part of the Initial Works. Project Co shall connect the grounding copper bus bar the main ground grid and bond the door frames of each such room to the grounding bus bar.
Requirement
section 3.7.2

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.11 (o)
(ii) Project Co shall comply with the grounding and bonding requirements detailed in Section D.7 of this Schedule C-6.
Requirement
References to the document are provided for each requirement.

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.12 (f)
(i) A. provide a grounding system to create a low impedance path to earth ground for electrical surges and transient voltages in accordance with ANSI/TIA/EIA 607 and IEEE 1100;
Requirement
sections 3 and 4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.12 (f)
(i) C. provide grounding conductors that are copper;
Requirement
G.R 17

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART C - Stations
C.14.12 (f)
(i) E. use antioxidant when making bonding connections in the field;
Requirement
G.R 29

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.2.2 (v)
(i) D. approximate limits and location(s) of the proposed Electrification Infrastructure (such as EPB and associated fencing, flash plates, OCS hardware supports, grounding and bonding, etc.) being added to the bridge or at the Site;
Requirement
sections 2 and 4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.2.6 (b)
(ii)   Project Co shall provide the grounding and bonding as required in Schedule C-6, Section D.7 Grounding, Bonding and Traction Power Return System.
Requirement
References to the document are provided for each requirement.

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.2.6 (b)
(vi) B. Where Project Co provides non-conductive EPB, Project Co shall surround the non-conductive EPB with a grounded bare conductor that is inter-connected with the traction system ground in accordance with Schedule C-6, Section D.7 Grounding, Bonding and Traction Power Return System.
Requirement


Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.2.6 (b)
(vi) C. Project Co shall bond and ground conductive EPB and additional fencing, by inter-connection with the traction system ground in accordance with Schedule C-6-D-7 Grounding, Bonding and Traction Power Return System.
Requirement
4.3.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.2.6 (b)
(vi) D. Other metallic items under Overhead Bridges, within the OCLZ to be defined by Project Co, shall be directly or indirectly bonded to the static wires in accordance with Schedule C-6, Section D.7 Grounding, Bonding and Traction Power Return System.
Requirement
2.5, 3.3, 3.4 and 4.3 

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.4.3 (c)
(c) Project Co shall provide New Project Co Equipment and Existing Project Co Equipment that complies with the step and touch potential requirements and ground potential rise requirements specified in OESC, IEEE 80 and EN 50122-1. At each of the Design Development Submittals stage, Systems Design Development Submittals stage and Construction Document Submittals stage, Project Co shall submit in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure a step and touch potential report that shall demonstrate that all infrastructure associated with the New Project Co Equipment and Existing Project Co Equipment comply with the step and touch potential limits defined in IEC Standard 62128-1 (each, a “Step and Touch Potential Report”).
Requirement
section 4
Safety of the equipment will be verified by GPR, step and touch voltage study in section 4.1 and 4.7.1. and rail voltage calculation by E&M section 3.2.3.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.4.8 (a)
(iii) At each of the Design Development Submittals stage, System Design Development Submittals stage and Construction Document Submittals stage, Project Co shall submit in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure, a rail bonding calculation report (the “Rail Bonding Calculation Report”) that includes:
Requirement
3.2.3 and its reference
This will be a part of traction power load flow study which will be provided by E&M and reference of section 3.2.3
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.6.2 (g)
(viii) Project Co shall provide grounding and bonding to the bridge and its appurtenances in accordance with the requirements of Section D.7 – Grounding, Bonding and Traction Power Return System.
Requirement
section 4.4

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - Initial Works - APPENDIX C - Union Station City of Toronto Interfaces
4.2 (a)
(iv) grounding and bonding systems;
Requirement
G.R.10

