Design Criteria
Basis of Design – Corridors – Civil Infrastructure Line Works
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00013














04/13/23
D01.03
DDD Interdisciplinary Review
W. Gao /
J. Grant /
A. Howell / 
D. Booy
R. Rizwan / 
B. Orendorff / 
B. Uriev / 
L. Halayko
A. Contramaestre / J. Malik
R. Orsi
DATE
MM/DD/YYYY
REV.
STATUS
PREPARED BY
CHECKED BY
APPROVED BY
APPROVED BY

Discipline Lead
Functional Manager



DISCLAIMER
© 2023. This document has been produced and distributed for members of ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP’s purposes in respect of the GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor (RER Package 3) project only. No part of this document may be reproduced, published, converted, or stored in any data retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the Designers, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING. This document must not be used by the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP (or any of its constituent members) for any other purpose, or provided to, relied upon or used by any other person without ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING’s prior written consent.
All Confidential Information shall remain the sole property of the applicable Sponsor or the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP or ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING and each party shall treat it as confidential. Confidential Information shall not be used by for any purpose other than for performing their respective duties on the GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor (RER Package 3) Project.
This report contains the expression of the opinion of, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING using its professional judgment and reasonable care based on information available and conditions existing at the time of preparation. The use of, or reliance upon this report is subject to the relevant Design Services Agreement between ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING and the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP (the “DSA”) and the following:
This report is to be read in the context of and subject to the terms of the DSA, including any methodologies, procedures, techniques, assumptions and other relevant terms or conditions specified in the DSA. 
This report is meant to be read as a whole, and sections of the report must not be read or relied upon out of context. This report is meant to be used in its unaltered form, as delivered by ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING, and any modifications to the report, or the methodologies, procedures, techniques, assumptions used, without the consent of ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING may invalidate the conclusions, outputs or expressions of opinion, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING does not accept any liability in connection with such altered information; and 
Unless expressly stated otherwise in this report, ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING has not verified the accuracy, completeness or validity of any information provided to ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING by or on behalf of the ONXPRESS CIVILS CONTRACTOR GP and ONXPRESS CJV ENGINEERING does not accept any liability in connection with such information.


Table of Contents
DISCLAIMER
1.	Introduction	1
1.1	Purpose	1
1.2	GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor	1
1.3	ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Civil Works	2
2.	Construction Package Types - Basis of Design Reports Delineation	5
3.	Units	5
4.	Abbreviations	6
5.	Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations	7
5.1	Standards, Codes and Regulations 	7
5.2	Stakeholders Standards 	11
6.	Safety Assurance	12
7.	Level of Development	12
8.	Materials	12
8.1	Track	12
8.2	Sub-ballast	13
8.3	Common/Native Fill	13
8.4	Road Base	13
8.5	Road Subbase	14
8.6	Pipe/Cable Trench Bedding	14
8.7	Rip-rap	14
8.8	Rock Protection	14
8.9	Clear Stone	14
8.10	Unshrinkable Fill	14
8.11	Surface Course Asphaltic Concrete	15
8.12	Wearing Course Asphaltic Concrete	15
8.13	Pipes and Culverts	15
8.14	Manholes and Catch Basins	15
9.	Civil Earthworks	15
9.1	Civil Scope of Work	15
9.2	Design Approach	16
9.3	Design Standards	16
9.4	Design Methodology	17
9.5	Survey	18
9.6	Design Criteria	19
9.6.1	Clearing and Grubbing	19
9.6.2	Site Preparation	19
9.6.3	Excavation and Fill	19
9.6.4	Surface Restoration	20
9.6.5	Grading	20
9.6.6	Fencing	20
9.6.7	Snowdrift Control	21
9.6.8	Permanent Erosion and Sediment Protection	21
9.6.9	Frost Protection	21
9.6.10	Installation Criteria for Buried Services	21
9.6.11	Retaining Walls	22
9.6.12	Retaining Wall Loading	23
9.6.13	Lateral Displacement of Retaining Walls	23
9.6.14	Geotechnical Design of Retaining Walls	23
9.6.15	Retaining Wall Surface Patterns	23
9.6.16	Types of Retaining Walls	23
9.6.17	Design Life	24
9.6.18	Parking Areas	24
9.6.19	Roadside Barriers	25
9.6.20	Design Loading	25
9.6.21	Non-Trafficable Areas	26
9.7	Inputs and Outputs	26
10.	Drainage & Stormwater Management (SWM)	27
10.1	Drainage Scope of Work	27
10.2	Design Approach	27
10.3	Design Standards	27
10.4	Design Methodology	31
10.5	Design Criteria	32
10.5.1	Design Rainfall	32
10.5.2	Flooding	33
10.5.3	Extreme Events	33
10.5.4	Water Quality Control	33
10.5.5	Water Quantity Control	34
10.5.6	Water Balance	35
10.5.7	Conveyance	35
10.5.8	New Storm Sewers	35
10.5.9	Culverts and Bridges	35
10.5.10	Natural Streams and Watercourses	36
10.5.11	Sediment and Erosion Control	36
10.6	Design Life	36
10.7	Inputs and Outputs	37
11.	Traffic	38
11.1	Traffic Scope of Work	38
11.2	Design Approach	38
11.2.1	Traffic and Transit Management Plan Objectives	38
11.2.2	Traffic Control Plan Consideration	39
11.3	Traffic Impact Considerations	40
11.4	Design Standards	40
11.4.1	Highway Capacity Manual (Transportation Research Board (TRB), 2022)	40
11.4.2	Municipal Guidelines for the Traffic Impact Studies and Traffic Analysis	40
11.4.3	Ontario Traffic Manuals	41
11.5	Design Methodology	41
11.5.1	Data Collection	41
11.5.2	Existing Traffic Operations	41
11.5.3	Future Traffic Operations during Construction	41
12.	At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings	41
12.1	Roadway Scope of Work	41
12.2	Location, Chainage and Site Conditions	42
12.3	Design Aspects of Construction Stage	42
12.4	Design Approach	42
12.5	Design Standards	43
12.6	Primary Design Issues	44
12.6.1	Physical Layout	45
12.6.2	Degree of Protection	45
12.7	Design Methodology	45
12.8	Design Life	46
12.9	Inputs and Outputs	46
12.10	Other Notes	46
13.	References and Interfaces	47

List of Tables
Table 1-1: Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works Construction Stage Descriptions	3
Table 1-2: Bundle 2 Development Phase Early Works Construction Stage Descriptions	3
Table 4-1: List of Abbreviations	6
Table 5-1: Standards, Codes and Regulations	9
Table 5-2: Standards and Guidelines	11
Table 8-1: Road Base Gradation Requirements	13
Table 8-2: Road Subbase Gradation Requirements	14
Table 9-1: Topographical and Top of Rail Survey Basis for Rail Corridors	18
Table 9-2: Proposed Types of Retaining Walls	23
Table 9-3: Minimum Design Life of Retaining Walls	24
Table 9-4: Civil Earthworks – Design Inputs and Outputs	26
Table 10-1: Conservation Authorities and Municipalities covered by Corridors	29
Table 10-2: Rainfall Depth (mm) for Toronto City Weather Station (Pearson Int.)	32
Table 10-3: Rainfall Intensity (mm/hr) for Toronto City Weather Station (Pearson Int.)	32
Table 10-4: Approximate Average Expected Useful Life of Stormwater Assets	37
Table 10-5: Drainage – Design Inputs and Outputs	37
Table 13-1: Reference Design Basis Reports	47

List of Figures
Figure 1-1: ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Track Works Development Context Plan	2
Figure 2-1: Delineation of Basis of Design Reports per Construction Package Type	5
Figure 10-1: Conservation Authorities Regulatory Boundaries	31
Figure 12-1: GO Transit Track Standards Appendix U – May 2018	44

List of Appendices
Appendix A	Requirements Allocation for Civil Infrastructure Line Works
Appendix B	Design Methodology Flow Charts











1.Introduction
1.1Purpose
Metrolinx (Contracting Authority) has engaged the ONxpress Transportation Partners Inc. Joint Venture (ONxpress) to design and build the GO Rail Expansion - On-Corridor Program (OnCorr).
The purpose of this report is to describe the basis of design for the civil infrastructure works associated with civil earthworks, drainage, retaining walls, traffic and road works within the Corridors Right-of-Way, and establishes:
Minimum standards
Safety of personnel and equipment
Legal regulatory and statutory requirements
Environmental and sustainable development objectives
Minimum life-cycle costs.
This document is intended for use by the civil infrastructure design team and other design disciplines, as well as any external design consultants engaged to perform design work for the project, whether in direct support or within the scope of external design limits, e.g., C-5 Projects.
This report should be read in conjunction with the latest version of the Project Agreement (PA) and other Construction Package Type specific Basis of Design reports (refer to Section 2). This report is part of the Design Development phase with the objective to:
Document the rationale, criteria, principles, assumptions, and constraints used for the detailed design of the project.
Identify discipline design Standards, Codes and Practices to apply to the design approach and maintain consistency and efficiency throughout the Program.
Propose integrated design procedures for elements of scope requiring multiple design disciplines.
1.2GO Rail Expansion – On Corridor
GO Transit is a regional transit system serving the Golden Horseshoe region of Ontario with hub at Union Station in Toronto. It operates on infrastructure that is either owned by Metrolinx (MX territory), or by third parties such as CN or CP (non-MX territory).
GO Rail Expansion is a program which will provide more travel options for residents and commuters. Upon delivery, the GO Rail Expansion program will provide faster, more frequent, two-way, all-day service on core segments of the GO rail network.
The On-Corridor Works project is part of the Province's GO Rail Expansion. Under the GO Expansion, the fleet is expected to switch to electric locomotives.
1.3ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Civil Works 
The Civil Infrastructure Trackwork includes the construction of new and modification of existing sections of track, including alignment, cable containment, grading, drainage, addition, or modification to retaining walls, relocation of utilities, noise barriers, fences, removal or modification of level crossings and modifications to existing stations, foundations for overhead catenary system (OCS), specific to the work required to achieve the Service Level for each Configuration State.

Figure 1-1: ONxpress CC (Civil) Infrastructure Track Works Development Context Plan
This Basis of Design report is initially focused on the Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works identified by ONxpress as the locations of the early design works priority for CJV and CJV Engineering, as illustrated in 1-1 and summarized in Table 1-1. This includes the design requirements for the new civil works or modifications to existing civil works including earthworks, grading, drainage, etc. at 17 different locations, across the GO Transit Corridors.
Table 1-1: Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works Construction Stage Descriptions
Go Transit Corridor (Sub-Division)
Bundle 1 Development Phase Early Works
Construction Stage Descriptions
Lakeshore West (Oakville)
Stage 3 - Mimico East Extension (OAK 7+900 to 13+050)

Stage 4 - Canpa (OAK 13+050 - 15+250)

Stage 9A - Burlington (OAK 45+600 - 51+400)
Kitchener (Weston – Guelph)
Stage 7A - Etobicoke & Islington (WES 15+600 to 19+950)

Stage 9 - Malton (WES 23+400 to 27+000)
Barrie (Newmarket)
Stage 6 - Maple to Kirby Station (NWM 29+700 to 33+200)

Stage 12A - East Gwillimbury Station (NWM 55+537 to 57+580)

Stage 15 - Bradford Station (NWM 66+022 to 68+536)

C5 - Project 31 Barrie Grading - Contract 2 Project

Stage 19A - Innisfill Station (NWM 86+117 to 92+683)	
Richmond Hill (Bala)
Stage 1 - Don Valley Park (BAL 2+920 to 10+000) Inc Project 81 - Rosedale

Stage 2 - Wexford - Maryvale (BAL 10+000 to 17+900)

Stage 3 - Oriole Station to Old Cummer Station (BAL 17+900 to 25+600)
Lakeshore East (Kingston)
Stage 2A - Danforth St to Kennedy Rd (KNG 7+400 to 12+500)

Stage 3A - Scarborough Junction (KNG 12+500 to 14+700)	

Stage 9 - Durham Junction (KNG-GO 28+600 to 36+000)

Stage 11A - West Whitby to Oshawa (GO 44+000 to 50+660)

This Basis of Design report may, from time to time, require to be revised as the development phase works priorities shift to the Bundle 2 Development Phase Early Works locations, as summarized in Table 1-2.
Table 1-2: Bundle 2 Development Phase Early Works Construction Stage Descriptions
Go Transit Corridor (Sub-Division
Bundle 2 Development Phase Early Works
Construction Stage Descriptions
Lakeshore West (Oakville)
Stage 1 - Exhibition Station (OAK 3+100 to 4+900)

Stage 2 - Humber East (OAK 4+900 to 7+900)

Stage 5 - Port Credit East (OAK 15+250 - 26+000)

Stage 6 - Clarkson West (OAK 26+000 - 29+400)

Stage 7 - Oakville (OAK 29+400 - 35+350)

Stage 8 - Appleby & Bronte (OAK 35+350 to 45+600)

Stage 9B - Burlington (OAK 45+600 to 51+400)
Lakeshore East (Kingston)
Stage 0 - Don Valley Parkway to Gerard (KNG 2+650 to 5+380)

Stage 1 - Gerard to West Danforth (Woodbine Ave) (KNG 5+380 to 7+400)

Stage 2B - Danforth St to Kennedy Rd (KNG 7+400 to 12+500)

Stage 3B - Scarborough Junction (KNG 12+500 to 14+700)

Stage 4 - Eglinton (KNG 14+700 to 16+750)

Stage 5 - Eglinton to Guildwood (KNG 16+750 to 20+000)

Stage 6 - Guildwood to Morningside Ave (KNG 20+000 to 21+600)

Stage 7 - Morningside to Highland Creek (KNG 21+600 to 24+700)

Stage 8 - Highland Creek to Rouge River (KNG 24+700 to 28+600)

Stage 10 - Pickering to West Whitby (GO 36+000 to 44+000)

Stage 11B - West Whitby to Oshawa (GO 44+000 to 50+660)
Union Station Rail Corridor
USRC Stage 0 Design Works
Scope descriptions of each of the above Construction Stages are documented in a separate Construction Stage Scope Description report, Ref. ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-EGM-RPT-00002.
2.Construction Package Types - Basis of Design Reports Delineation
The main purpose of this document is to provide requirements regarding the drainage and grading works on track works as per the Figure 2-1 (below). Any civil and grading works within the corridor will interface with the Track Team at the sub ballast/subgrade level and edge of sub ballast. There may be civil earthworks and drainage scope outside of the cross section shown in Figure 2-1 such as the full extents of the right-of way, laydown areas, access/maintenance roads and areas, etc.









Figure 2-1: Delineation of Basis of Design Reports per Construction Package Type

The cross section shown in the figure above is provided for visual purposes only and the values provided in the figure are not to be used for design purposes and does not reflect the proposed design of the track works. 
3.Units
All units shall be expressed in the form of International System of Units (SI - Metric) unless required to use an alternative unit system (i.e., United States Customary Units - Imperial) by stakeholders or governing body.
4.Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are commonly used in the Project Agreement, Metrolinx, ONxpress, Regulators and other stakeholders’ documentation. Some of the terms used are acronyms developed by ONxpress to organize the work of the RER3 program.
Table 4-1: List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Name
BAR
Barrie – Newmarket GO railway line
BIM
Building Information Modelling
C-5
Schedule C-5 of the Project Agreement
C-6
Schedule C-6 of the Project Agreement
CDS
Construction Document Development
CJV
Construction Joint Venture
CN
Canadian National Railway
COT
City of Toronto
CP
Canadian Pacific Railway
DDD
Design Development Definition
DDS
Design Development Submission
EA
Environmental Assessment
EJV
Engineering Joint Venture
GTA
Greater Toronto Area
IFC
Issued for Construction
IFP
Issued for Permit
IFT
Issued for Tender
IO
Infrastructure Ontario
KIT
Kitchener – Weston-Guelph GO railway line
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LOD
Level of Detail
LOI
Level of Information
LOS
Level of Service
LSE
Lakeshore East GO railway line
LSW
Lakeshore West GO railway line
MAPP
Metrolinx Assent Protection Plan
MTO
Ministry of Transportation Ontario
MX
Metrolinx
OCS
Overhead Catenary System
OPSD
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawing
OCLZ
Overhead Contact Line Zone
PA
Project Agreement
PLAA
Permits, Licenses, Approvals and Agreements
PS
Paralleling Station
PSOS
Project Specific Output Specifications
RCD
Reference Concept Design
RER
GO Regional Express Rail
RIC
Richmond Hill – Bala GO railway line
SOW
Scope of Work
SPA
Site Plan Control Approval
SWS
Switching Station
TEDI
Thermal Energy Demand Intensity
TGS
Toronto Green Standards
TRCA
Toronto Region Conservation Authority
TPAP
Transit Project Assessment Process
TPFs
Traction Power Facilities
TPSS
Traction Power Sub Station
TTC
Toronto Transit Commission
USEP
Union Station Expansion Project
USRC
Union Station Rail Corridor
5.Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
5.1Standards, Codes and Regulations 
Unless specifically stated otherwise, the design shall be based on applicable parts of the following codes, specifications, standards, regulations, and other references. In addition to these, the design shall comply with any laws or regulations of local authorities. In the event of conflicting requirements, the most stringent shall apply. The design shall comply with the requirements of all statutory bodies having jurisdiction over any part of the work including Fire, Building and Local Authorities including, but not limited to those listed in Table 6-1.
Standards referred to in this document are provided in Table 6-2: Standards and Guidelines
ID
Name
CN
Canadian National Railway
CN [1]
Guidelines for Design of Railway Structures
CN [2]
Manual of Practice for the Maintenance of Railway Structures
CN [3]
Standard Practice Circular (SPC) 4402, Culverts
COT
City of Toronto
COT [1]
City of Toronto – Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains
COT [2]

City of Toronto – Transportation Services Road Engineering Design Guidelines
COT [3]
City of Toronto – Transportation Services Multi-use Trail Design Guidelines
COT [4]
Toronto Complete Streets Guidelines – Street Design for Cycling
COT [5]
City of Toronto Development Infrastructure Policy & Standards for Public Local Residential Streets and Private Streets
COT [6]
City of Toronto Multi-use Path Design Guidelines
GO-DRM-STD
GO Design Requirements Manual
IESNA
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
MX DS-02
Universal Design Standard
MX DS-03
Wayfinding Design Standard
MX DS-04
GO Station Design Standard
MX DGL-02
Vegetative Screens v1.1
OPS
Ontario Provincial Standard for Road and Public Works
OPSS
Ontario Provincial Standard Specifications
OPSD
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawings
RC-0506-02TRK
GO Transit Track Standards
RC-0506-04STR
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures
TADG
Toronto Accessibility Design Guidelines
TRCA 
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority
TRCA [1]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Stormwater Management Criteria
TRCA & CVC [2]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Low Impact Development Stormwater Management Planning and Design Guide
TRCA [3]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Planning and Development Procedural Manual
TRCA [4]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Erosion and Sediment Control Guide for Urban Construction
WWFMG
Wet Weather Flow Management Guidelines
-
City of Markham – Engineering Design Criteria
-
York Region – Road Design Guidelines
6.Safety Assurance
Safe solutions are part of our core value, thus will be embedded in all design aspects related to the Infrastructure Civil Works. The design process will ensure compliance to applicable codes, regulations, standards, as well as project specific safety requirements.
. Items with a number in square brackets (e.g. [1]) denote specific documents while item without a number are general references to sources of standards.
Table 6-1: Standards, Codes and Regulations
ID
Name
AASHTO  
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
AASHTO [1]
AASHTO Bridge Design Specification
AISC
American Institute of Steel Construction
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
AREMA
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association
ASCE
American Society of Civil Engineers
ASCE [1]
ASCE/CSCE Cold Regions Utility Monograph
ASHRAE
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers
ASME
American Society of Mechanical Engineers
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials
AWWA
American Water Works Association
AWWA D100 [1]
AWWA D100 Standard for Welded Steel Tanks
AWWA D120 [2]
AWWA D120 Standard for FRP Tanks
CAN/CSA
Canadian Standards Association
CCME
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment
CEC
Canadian Electrical Code
CEPA
Canadian Environmental Protection Act
CFEM
Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual
CGBC
Canada Green Building Council
CHBDC
Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code
CLOCA
Central Lake Ontario Conservation Authority
CSCE
Canadian Society of Civil Engineers
CSPI
Corrugated Steel Pipe Institute
CSPI [1]
CSPI Handbook of Steel Drainage and Highway Construction
CVC
Credit Valley Conservation
CVC [1]
CVC Low Impact Development Construction Guide
EPA
Environmental Protection Agency
HI
Hydraulic Institute
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
LSRCA
Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority
LSRCA [1]
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Master Plan Guidelines
LSRCA [2]
Hydrogeological Assessment Submission
LSRCA [3]
Technical Guidelines for Stormwater Management Submissions
LSRCA [4]
Stormwater Management Guidelines
MBMA
Metal Buildings Manufacturers Association
MECP
Ontario Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Parks
MECP [1]
MECP Stormwater Management Planning and Design Manual
MECP [2]
MECP Design Guideline for Sewage Works
MECP [3]
MECP Low Impact Development Stormwater Management Guidance Manual
MNRF
Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry
MNRF [1]
Technical Guide: River and Stream Systems: Erosion Hazard Limits
MNRF [2]
Technical Guide: River and Stream Systems: Flooding Hazard Limits
MTO
Ontario Ministry of Transportation
MTO [1]
MTO Drainage Management Manual
MTO [2]
MTO Environmental Guide for Erosion and Sediment Control During Construction of Highway Projects
MTO [3]
MTO Gravity Pipe Design Guidelines for Circular Culverts and Storm Sewers
MTO [4]
MTO Highway Drainage Design Standards 
MTO [5]
MTO Designated Sources for Material (DSM)
MTO [6]
MTO Design Supplement for TAC Geometric Design Guide
MTO [7]
MTO Roadside Design Manual
NECB
National Energy Code of Canada for Buildings
NFPA
National Fire Protection Association
NFPA 101 [1]
National Fire Protection Association, Life Safety Code
NFPA 130 [2]
National Fire Protection Association, Standard for Fixed Guideway Transit and Passenger Rail Systems
NRCS
Natural Resources Conservation Service
OBC
Ontario Building Code
OESC
Ontario Electrical Safety Code
OFC
Ontario Fire Code 
OHSA
Occupational Health and Safety Act 
OSHA
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
OTC
Ontario Traffic Council
OTC [1]
Ontario Traffic Manual (OTM)
PPI
Plastic Pipe Institute
PPI [1]
PPI Handbook of Polyethylene Pipe
R.S.O., 1990, c C.27
Ontario Conservation Authorities Act
R.S.O., 1990, c O.40
Ontario Water Resources Act
O Reg 525/98 [1]
Ontario Regulation 525/98 – Approval Exemption
R.S.C., 1985, c. F-14
Fisheries Act
TAC
Transportation Association of Canada
TAC [1]
TAC Geometric Design for Canadian Roads (Part 1 & 2)
TAC [2]
TAC Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Canada (MUTCDC) 
TC
Transport Canada
TC [1]
TC Grade Crossings Standards
UL
Underwriters Laboratories 
ULC
Underwriters Laboratories of Canada
6.1Stakeholders Standards 
The following general design standards, codes and guidelines are followed or referred to where applicable:
Table 6-2: Standards and Guidelines
ID
Name
CN
Canadian National Railway
CN [1]
Guidelines for Design of Railway Structures
CN [2]
Manual of Practice for the Maintenance of Railway Structures
CN [3]
Standard Practice Circular (SPC) 4402, Culverts
COT
City of Toronto
COT [1]
City of Toronto – Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains
COT [2]

City of Toronto – Transportation Services Road Engineering Design Guidelines
COT [3]
City of Toronto – Transportation Services Multi-use Trail Design Guidelines
COT [4]
Toronto Complete Streets Guidelines – Street Design for Cycling
COT [5]
City of Toronto Development Infrastructure Policy & Standards for Public Local Residential Streets and Private Streets
COT [6]
City of Toronto Multi-use Path Design Guidelines
GO-DRM-STD
GO Design Requirements Manual
IESNA
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
MX DS-02
Universal Design Standard
MX DS-03
Wayfinding Design Standard
MX DS-04
GO Station Design Standard
MX DGL-02
Vegetative Screens v1.1
OPS
Ontario Provincial Standard for Road and Public Works
OPSS
Ontario Provincial Standard Specifications
OPSD
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawings
RC-0506-02TRK
GO Transit Track Standards
RC-0506-04STR
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures
TADG
Toronto Accessibility Design Guidelines
TRCA 
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority
TRCA [1]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Stormwater Management Criteria
TRCA & CVC [2]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Low Impact Development Stormwater Management Planning and Design Guide
TRCA [3]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Planning and Development Procedural Manual
TRCA [4]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Erosion and Sediment Control Guide for Urban Construction
WWFMG
Wet Weather Flow Management Guidelines
-
City of Markham – Engineering Design Criteria
-
York Region – Road Design Guidelines
7.Safety Assurance
Safe solutions are part of our core value, thus will be embedded in all design aspects related to the Infrastructure Civil Works. The design process will ensure compliance to applicable codes, regulations, standards, as well as project specific safety requirements.
8.Level of Development
The Level of Development (LOD) is a reference tool intended to improve the quality of communication among users of the Building Information Models (BIMs) about the characteristics of elements in the model. RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-IDD-MTX-00001 is the LOD matrix which has been developed for the project and details the development anticipated at each stage of the design phase (i.e., DDD, DDS, CDS, IFC etc.).
9.Materials 
All materials related to civil earthworks, drainage and road works shall be as per the relevant provincial and local standards but are subject to change based on material availability, cost, etc. The following sections are provided as a guideline only and does not necessarily reflect the final proposed material for these applications.
9.1Track
It is anticipated that no significant changes to track material will occur. Notably, mainline tracks will be ballasted using concrete or siding and storage tracks using concrete or wood ties. For details on track and rail material, refer to ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004 – Basis of Design – Corridors – Trackwork and Track Alignment.
9.2Sub-ballast
Material most commonly available for use as sub-ballast are those aggregates ordinarily specified and used in construction for highway bases and subbases. These include crushed stone, natural or crushed gravels, natural or manufactured sands, crushed slag, or a homogeneous mixture of these materials.
The sub-ballast shall be a granular material so graded as to prevent penetration into the subgrade and penetration of track ballast particles into the sub-ballast zone. Applying the filter principle used in drainage in accordance with Table 1-2-4 from AREMA MRE to the grading of the subgrade material will determine the grain size distribution of the sub-ballast.  
The exact gradation of sub-ballast material shall be determined as part of future detailed design (i.e., DDS, CDS) and shall be in accordance with the geotechnical recommendations and AREMA standards. 
The sub-ballast material shall comply with OPSS.MUNI 1010 Granular B Type II. The thickness of the sub-ballast layer shall consider the track geometric design and required train speed for each corridor and section of track. At a minimum, the depth of the sub-ballast in the mainline track shall be 305 mm. 
9.3Common/Native Fill
Backfill material should be free from rocks and hard earth clods larger than 3 in. (76 mm) in size. Well graded granular material containing a low amount of silt or clay is ideal to achieve a dense and stable fill. 
9.4Road Base
The Road Base material shall conform to the material and gradation requirements of Granular A material as described by OPSS.PROV 1010. The gradation of Granular A material is defined in the following table.
Table 9-1: Road Base Gradation Requirements
Sieve Size
Percent Passing (%)
26.5 mm
100
19.0 mm
85 – 100
13.2 mm
65 – 90
9.5 mm
50 – 73
4.75 mm
35 – 55
1.18 mm
15 – 40
300 µm
5 – 22
75 µm
2 – 8
9.5Road Subbase
The Road Subbase material shall conform to the material and gradation requirements of Granular B material as described by OPSS.PROV 1010. The gradation of Granular B material is defined in the following table.
Table 9-2: Road Subbase Gradation Requirements
Sieve Size
Percent Passing (%)

Type I
Type II
Type III
150 mm
100
–
100
106 mm
–
100
–
26.5 mm
50 – 100
50 – 100
50 – 100
9.5 mm
–
–
32 – 100
4.75 mm
20 – 100
20 – 55
20 – 90
1.18 mm
10 – 100
10 – 40
10 – 60
300 µm
2 – 65
5 – 22
2 – 35
75 µm
0 – 8
0 – 10
0 – 8

9.6Pipe/Cable Trench Bedding
The material requirements for embedment, bedding, cover, and granular material shall be in accordance with OPSS.PROV 401. Bedding material refers to the backfill material underneath the buried asset (i.e., culvert, pipe, utility cable, etc.). The embedment, bedding, and cover material and shall either be Granular A, Granular B, or unshrinkable fill. 
9.7Rip-rap
Rip-rap material used throughout the project limits shall conform to OPSS.PROV 1004. In general, rip-rap shall consist of crushed or fractured cobbles or boulders and be greater than 300 mm in diameter. 
9.8Rock Protection
Rock protection (or rock armor) material used throughout the project limits shall conform to OPSS.PROV 1004. Rock protection shall be greater than 300 mm in diameter.
9.9Clear Stone
Clear stone shall conform to the material, physical property, and gradation requirements specified in OPSS.PROV 1004. The gradation of clear stone will vary depending on the application and will be evaluated on case-by-case basis.  
9.10Unshrinkable Fill
Unshrinkable fill refers to a self-compacting cement treated aggregate that has flowable consistency and controlled low strength properties. In areas where unshrinkable fill is used on the project, the material requirements shall be in accordance with OPSS.MUNI 1359. 
9.11Surface Course Asphaltic Concrete
The surface course asphaltic concrete shall be per OPSS.MUNI 1150 unless governed by applicable local municipality standards and guidelines. In general, the surface asphaltic concrete shall conform to the material specifications of Hot Laid 3 (HL 3) as per OPSS.MUNI 1150.
9.12Wearing Course Asphaltic Concrete
The wearing course asphaltic concrete shall be per OPSS.MUNI 1150 unless governed by applicable local municipality standards and guidelines. In general, the wearing asphaltic concrete shall conform to the material specifications of Hot Laid 8 (HL 8) as per OPSS.MUNI 1150.
9.13Pipes and Culverts
The material of storm sewers and culverts shall be evaluated with consideration to stormwater contamination potential, soil types, loading conditions, design life and cost. Potential material choices for storm pipes and culverts include PVC, HDPE, concrete, or corrugated steel and shall be in accordance with provincial (i.e., OPSS) and municipal standards and guidelines.
9.14Manholes and Catch Basins
The material choice for stormwater infrastructure such as manholes and catch basins shall consider the potential structural design loads to due to soil backfill, vehicle loads, and/or train live load surcharge and other site-specific design constraints. These assets shall be in accordance with relevant provincial (i.e., OPSS) and municipal standards and guidelines.
10.Civil Earthworks
This section provides a summary of design criteria, methodology, considerations and assumptions used in the design of civil infrastructure on the heavy rail Metrolinx Sub-divisions.
10.1Civil Scope of Work
Civil earthworks refers to the process of modifying and managing earth (i.e., soil, aggregate, etc.) related to the construction of surface facilities and subsurface structures. At a high level, earthworks consist of site preparation (clearing and grubbing), excavation and trenching, filling (backfilling), site grading, surface restoration, etc. 
Within the corridor, as this document pertains to, civil earthworks will include the excavation and/or trenching for foundations of aboveground infrastructure such as OCS structures, railway signals, utility poles, grade-separated bridge foundations, and other rail facilities. All aboveground structures will require site grading and earthworks to ensure drainage of stormwater away from foundations and towards stormwater management infrastructure. Excavation and trenching work will also be required for all buried infrastructure which may consist of underground utilities and services, cable containment conduits, and stormwater assets (culverts, subdrains, catch basins, manholes, etc.). Additionally, this section will pertain to civil earthworks regarding retaining walls, fencing, and roadways within the corridor (access and maintenance roads).
10.2Design Approach
The scope of civil earthwork activities will interface with several disciplines such as track, drainage, geo-engineering, cable containment, utilities, and environment teams. The design approach will be a collaborative process and consist of information being transferred between disciplines, identifying conflicts, and coordinating to reach a viable solution. Generally, the initial size and location of the infrastructure will be determined by the originating discipline and the Civil team will collaborate to ensure there are no physical constraints and conflicts while maintaining accordance with all relevant municipality and provincial standards and guidelines. 
10.3Design Standards
The design of civil earthworks shall be performed in accordance with the standards listed in the PA Schedule C-6 and requirements of provincial and municipal guidelines and standards. Notable reference documents are the Ontario Provincial Standards (OPS) provided by the MTO. For other applicable standards and regulations, see Table 6-1 and Table 6-2: Standards and Guidelines
ID
Name
CN
Canadian National Railway
CN [1]
Guidelines for Design of Railway Structures
CN [2]
Manual of Practice for the Maintenance of Railway Structures
CN [3]
Standard Practice Circular (SPC) 4402, Culverts
COT
City of Toronto
COT [1]
City of Toronto – Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains
COT [2]

City of Toronto – Transportation Services Road Engineering Design Guidelines
COT [3]
City of Toronto – Transportation Services Multi-use Trail Design Guidelines
COT [4]
Toronto Complete Streets Guidelines – Street Design for Cycling
COT [5]
City of Toronto Development Infrastructure Policy & Standards for Public Local Residential Streets and Private Streets
COT [6]
City of Toronto Multi-use Path Design Guidelines
GO-DRM-STD
GO Design Requirements Manual
IESNA
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
MX DS-02
Universal Design Standard
MX DS-03
Wayfinding Design Standard
MX DS-04
GO Station Design Standard
MX DGL-02
Vegetative Screens v1.1
OPS
Ontario Provincial Standard for Road and Public Works
OPSS
Ontario Provincial Standard Specifications
OPSD
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawings
RC-0506-02TRK
GO Transit Track Standards
RC-0506-04STR
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures
TADG
Toronto Accessibility Design Guidelines
TRCA 
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority
TRCA [1]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Stormwater Management Criteria
TRCA & CVC [2]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Low Impact Development Stormwater Management Planning and Design Guide
TRCA [3]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Planning and Development Procedural Manual
TRCA [4]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Erosion and Sediment Control Guide for Urban Construction
WWFMG
Wet Weather Flow Management Guidelines
-
City of Markham – Engineering Design Criteria
-
York Region – Road Design Guidelines
11.Safety Assurance
Safe solutions are part of our core value, thus will be embedded in all design aspects related to the Infrastructure Civil Works. The design process will ensure compliance to applicable codes, regulations, standards, as well as project specific safety requirements.
.
11.1Design Methodology
The design methodology of civil earthwork activities will vary throughout the project scope but will generally consist of the following:
1.Review municipal, provincial, and/or site-specific reference documents/drawings,
2.Perform site visit investigations (if required),
3.Complete topographical and legal survey,
4.Identify and compile site or design constraints,
5.Develop construction and material specifications,
6.Coordinate with relevant disciplines (Geotechnical investigation, project-wide or site-specific Environmental Management Plan, etc.),
7.Develop and design preliminary civil layout and grading plans,
8.Review design and construction staging packages with municipality and/or stakeholder(s),
9.Develop 3D model,
10.Determine material quantity estimate for civil works.
11.2Survey
As per the PA Schedule C-6, there are several types of surveys required for the project works. The following surveys will be incorporated into the design of civil earthworks, as a design input from CJV, and will interface with their respective survey requirements memorandums.
Control Survey
Legal Survey
Topographical Survey
Pre- and Post-Construction Utility Survey
Structures and Pavement Condition Survey
CCTV Survey.
Survey type and requirements shall be in accordance with RER3-ECW-PW-0000-SWS-SUR-TMO-00001 – Technical Memo EJV Survey Requirements. For areas requiring further detail or specific requirements, a site-specific Topographical Survey Memo will be prepared and provided to CJV. 
At the time of publishing of this document, the following topographical surveys are being used as the basis of design. As more topographical survey data is received, the latest data set shall be incorporated at the appropriate time.
Table 11-1: Topographical and Top of Rail Survey Basis for Rail Corridors
Item
Corridor
Stage
DDD Survey Basis
Survey Class
1
LSE
Stage 1 - Gerard to West Danforth 1
Tulloch LIO
C
2
LSE
Stage 2 - Danforth St to Kennedy Rd
Tulloch LIO / Groma
C
3
LSE
Stage 3 - Scarborough Junction
Tulloch / Groma
C
4
LSE
Stage 9 - Durham Junction
Tulloch LIO
C
5
LSE
Stage 11 - West Whitby to Oshawa
Groma
C
6
STO
Stage 7A - Stouffville Station
Tulloch LIO
C
7
BAR
Stage 6 - Maple to Kirby Station
Tulloch 2015
-
8
BAR
Stage 12A - East Gwillimbury Station
Tulloch 2015
-
9
BAR
Stage 15 - Bradford Station
Bid phase survey
-
10
BAR
Stage 19A - Innisfill Station
Bid phase survey
-
11
RIC
Stage 1 - Don Valley Park
Tulloch 2015 (DTM missing)
-
12
RIC
Stage 2 - Wexford - Maryvale
Tulloch 2015 (DTM missing)
-
13
RIC
Stage 3 - Oriole Station to Old Cummer Station
Tulloch 2015 (DTM missing)
-
14
LSW
Stage 3 - Mimico East Extension
Tulloch LIO
C
15
LSW
Stage 4 - Canpa
Tulloch LIO / Groma TOR
C
16
LSW
Stage 9A - Burlington
Tulloch LIO
C
17
KIT
Stage 7A - Etobicoke & Islington
Tulloch LIO
C
18
KIT
Stage 9 - Malton
Tulloch LIO
C

11.3Design Criteria
The following sections outline the requirements related to civil infrastructure works in accordance with applicable provincial or local guidelines and standards to assist in the design of PA Schedule C-6 facilities and structures. 
11.3.1Clearing and Grubbing
Clearing consists of cutting of standing trees, brush, bushes, and other vegetation and disposing of felled trees, and stumps. Clearing shall be contained within the limits shown on the applicable drawing and generally cut 150 mm above the natural/existing grade.
Grubbing consists of removal and disposal of stumps and roots, embedded logs, undergrowth, and debris on and below the ground surface. Grubbing shall be contained to the specified limits on the applicable drawing and performed to a minimum for the following areas:
General Areas: Minimum 200 mm below grade.
Ditches: Minimum 300 mm below grade.
Roadways: Minimum 900 mm below grade.
Pads: Minimum 600 mm below grade.
Any grubbed material and cleared material not required to be salvaged shall be mulched/chipped or sent off-site for recycling or composted. The removal and management of vegetation shall be in accordance with PA Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations.
11.3.2Site Preparation
Topsoil in areas of development shall be stripped and stockpiled as part of engineered and designed landforms for later spreading. Topsoil strip depth shall be in accordance with the site-specific Geotechnical investigation and recommendations of the area of concern. The maximum stockpile height of topsoil is 3 m, and the minimum batter slope shall be determined as part of the geotechnical analysis and material angle of repose.
11.3.3Excavation and Fill
Permanent and temporary cut and fill slopes shall be analyzed, designed, and approved by a Geotechnical Engineer. Geosynthetic reinforcement internal stability shall be designed by the supplier. Slope stability analysis shall be carried out for all earthwork structures and embankments retaining water or brine. 
Tolerance for excavation works varies depending on the application. The required tolerance shall be in accordance with OPSS.MUNI 206.
Drainage excavation operations shall be performed in a manner to avoid water saturation of embankment material and to avoid leaving undrained pockets in excavations by providing effective drainage during all stages of the work as per OPSS. PROV 206.
Excess excavated soil from trenching works and sub-surface investigation activities shall be managed with municipal and provincial standards and be in accordance with PA Schedule A-9 – Environmental Obligations.
11.3.4Surface Restoration
All disturbed areas, road embankments, and permanent soil stockpiles (including tailings management area ditches) situated outside the plant site shall be graded to ensure unobstructed surface runoff, and they shall be provided with a minimum of 100 mm of topsoil and hydro-seeded.  
Within the site, all permanent ditches shall be spread with minimum 100 mm topsoil and hydro-seeded when no other erosion protection is provided.  
Permanent ditches with flow velocities exceeding 1.5 m/s shall incorporate rip rap (rock or synthetic material) for armoring of civil structures against scour, and water or ice erosion.  
Seeding shall comply with local/municipal requirements for seeding. Where local requirements do not exist, seeding shall be in accordance with OPSS.MUNI 804 and Metrolinx Standard RC-0401-05, Vegetation Maintenance Requirements. 
11.3.5Grading
Municipal standards shall govern grading requirements in municipal areas. The following grading slopes shall be considered as a minimum recommendation in absence of municipal standards:
Grading slope of 2% away from structures for a minimum of 4 m,
For laydown areas, the minimum slope shall be 1%,
General areas shall be sloped at a minimum of 0.5%,
Concrete ramps shall have a maximum grade of 5%.
New grades shall be merged smoothly with existing grades without causing low areas, which can result in water ponding.
11.3.6Fencing
Fencing for the corridor Right-of-Way shall delineate the property boundary and provide safety and security using a 2.4 m security fence with anti-climb and anti-cut factors (TBC through the “Threat and Vulnerability Assessment”). All new fencing shall not impact the ability to access existing adjacent structures or properties.
All fencing components shall be galvanized steel. Fencing panels shall be of chain link construction (Refer to OPSS.PROV 771 Construction Specification for Standard Highway Fence). 
Gates shall be simple pole swing gates, single or double leaf depending on width to ensure reliable operation, with posts embedded in concrete foundations.
During construction fencing around laydown areas, and material-fuel storage areas shall be installed to secure the areas and to warn the public of ongoing construction on-site; An access gate shall be provided to each fenced-in enclosure; Vehicles access gate(s) shall be provided to accommodate the required vehicle type(s).
Existing fence shall be removed according to OPSS 510.07.04.01 Removal of Fence.
Any fencing located within the OCLZ is required to be grounded. For requirements regarding the grounding of fencing, refer to ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-GBN-DES-DCR-00001.
11.3.7Snowdrift Control
Snow drift control shall follow ASCE/CSCE Cold Regions Utility Monograph.
Snowdrift control devices, such as snow fences, may be implemented to mitigate the impact of drifting snow on site operations.  
Site facilities shall be designed to minimize excessive snow accumulation on the leeward side of the facilities.
Critical access points shall be placed so as to avoid areas with excessive snow drifting. 
Areas around buildings, roadways, and storage yards shall be elevated to create windswept conditions and minimize snow accumulation.
11.3.8Permanent Erosion and Sediment Protection
Erosion protection shall be provided in areas subject to velocity erosion from discharge outlets and stream/channel flow. Consider grass protection, rock protection, and prefabricated culvert ends. 
Grass erosion protection shall be limited to velocities less than 1.2 – 1.5 m/s. Temporary matting to support seed growth may be used. 
Rip rap shall not be applied to slopes steeper than 2H:1V. 
Rip rap in ditches shall be channel-shaped and keyed into the embankment.
Design of erosion protection shall consider construction method and the season in which the slope will be constructed to ensure that the erosion protection is effective.  
11.3.9Frost Protection
Buried services and utilities vulnerable to frost shall be adequately insulated to maintain the functionality of the service or buried below the frost penetration depth. The frost penetration depth will vary depending on the site location but is expected to range from 1.2 m to 1.6 m. The frost penetration depth shall be confirmed as part of the Geotechnical investigations.
11.3.10Installation Criteria for Buried Services
Minimum burial depth for buried services shall be determined as part of detailed design and shall be based on the anticipated loading and frost depth at the buried service location. 
Battery limit for buried services is 3 m outside the building footprint. 
Open trenching shall follow Ontario Occupational Health and Safety Act, unless site specific guidance is provided by the geotechnical engineer. 
Temporary trench protective structures shall be designed by a professional engineer for excavations deeper than 1.2 m deep per OHSA Standards.
Insulation or heat tracing shall be provided where insufficient earth cover exists such as ditch crossings, culvert crossings, and finished grade depressions, and where trade-off value is indicated. 
Certain systems in which the fluid will not be retained or can be shown not to be idle for extended periods of time to freeze may be installed at a shallower depth to reduce excavation and backfill volumes or achieve hydraulic gradients.
11.3.11Retaining Walls
This following section outlines temporary retaining walls only, any permanent retaining walls shall be in accordance with the applicable design of basis document(s) in Section 16.
Retaining walls shall be designed based on the site-specific conditions. Lateral pressure coefficients or soil spring moduli values for design of retaining walls shall be as per the Geotechnical Design Reports. 
Suitable conventional retaining walls, Mechanically Stabilized Earth (MSE) walls, gabions, crib walls, reinforced earth and other systems of retaining structures shall be used as needed and shall be assessed on a case-specific basis.
The material immediately adjacent to the wall should be non-cohesive and free draining. Cinders shall not be used. If a special back drain is installed, the pore size within the drain shall be coarse enough to permit free flow of water, but not so coarse that the fill material may ultimately move into it and clog it. Water from the free-draining materials shall be removed, preferably by horizontal drain pipes or by weep holes. Horizontal drain pipes, if used, shall be installed in such a position that they will function properly. Such drains shall be accessible for cleaning. Weep holes are considered less satisfactory than horizontal drains. If used, they shall have diameters not less than 150 mm and shall be spaced not over 3 m.
Geocomposite and/or geotextile materials in conjunction with free draining backfill may be used as approved by the Engineer.
ONxpress shall provide retaining structures where required to accommodate track modifications along the rail corridors. Temporary and permanent retaining walls will also be required for grade separations and structure modification. 
Per PA Schedule C-6, ONxpress shall design and construct all retaining wall structures that will be owned and maintained by Metrolinx and Municipalities regardless of the presence of Railway Traffic in compliance with:
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures, including all references specified therein
Municipal Standards
CHBDC
All applicable MTO structural standards and memoranda.
11.3.12Retaining Wall Loading
Live load surcharge, earth loads, and hydrostatic pressures will be considered for the design of the retaining walls in accordance with geotechnical and structural design criteria.  
11.3.13Lateral Displacement of Retaining Walls
Per PA Schedule C-6, the lateral displacement of all temporary and permanent retaining walls supporting railway vehicles shall be limited to maximum of 0.1% of the expected height of the wall.
11.3.14Geotechnical Design of Retaining Walls
Geotechnical investigations and recommendations at retaining wall locations will provide the subsurface conditions (i.e.  geotechnical resistances, site classification, active, passive, and at-rest pressure coefficients, etc.) required for retaining wall design. At-rest pressure coefficients will be provided by geotechnical engineer recommendation in accordance with the Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures Clause 20.3 but shall not be less than 0.5.
11.3.15Retaining Wall Surface Patterns
Per PA Schedule C-6, B.4.1 I, retaining wall surface patterns shall be selected and agreed to with the Municipality from the Metrolinx Standard DS-16 – Concrete Wall Surface Patterns – GO Transit Rail Corridors, Version 1.2, August 2020, inclusive of anti-graffiti coating.
11.3.16Types of Retaining Walls
Several retaining wall types will be used throughout the RER3 program. Retaining wall types were identified during the pursuit phase as presented in Typical Retaining Wall Sections of document RER3-WSH-STR-DRG-ALL-00058. A pros and cons list for the retaining wall types was also developed during the pursuit phase as Retaining Wall Pros and Cons List documented within RER3-WSH-STR-LST-ALL-00001. Table 11-2 below describes the types of retaining walls and their possible use scenarios. 
Table 11-2: Proposed Types of Retaining Walls
Types 
Description
Possible Scenarios
Possible Use
Secant Pile Wall
Formed by constructing alternating king and filler piles. Filler piles partially cut into either side of the primary piles in order to form a continuous, impervious structure. 
Suitable for narrow footprint and tall retained heights 4 m and taller in a cut area.
Temporary / Permanent
Sheet Pile Wall
Rolled steel section consisting of a plate with integral interlocks on each edge.
Can be in cantilever or anchored.
Suitable for narrow footprint and generally retained heights less than 4.5 m in a cut area.
Temporary / Permanent
Soldier pile with concrete lagging wall
Steel piles are installed in the ground around the excavation perimeter before excavation is started.
When excavation begins, horizontal lagging is installed between the piles to retain the soil. 
Can be in cantilever or anchored.
Suitable for narrow footprint. If in cantilever, can be used for retained heights less than 3 m with no live load surcharge. If anchored, can be used for retained heights up to 4.5 m.
Permanent. But can be used as temporary with lagging.
Retained Soil System (RSS) Wall
A composite structure consisting of alternating layers of compacted backfill and soil reinforcement elements, fixed to a wall facing.
Where sufficient ROW is available for the RSS wall straps, suitable for retained heights greater than 2 m with no live load surcharge.
Metrolinx approval is required for locations with live load surcharge. 
Permanent
L-Wall
Reinforced concrete ‘L’-shaped retaining wall. 
Suitable for retained heights less than 2.2 m with live load surcharge. 
Permanent
T-Wall
A gravity retaining wall system, consisting of modular precast concrete units and select backfill.
The concrete units are faced with monolithic perpendicular stems, forming the shape of a “T”. 
The stems internally stabilize the wall, providing pullout resistance against the lateral earth pressure exerted on the back of the facing.
Suitable for retained heights greater than 2.2 m with live load surcharge. Top stem shall not be placed directly under tracks.
Permanent
Toe wall
Cast-in-place concrete wall as per OPSD 3120.100
Suitable for cut and fill up to retained heights of 1.8 m with no live load surcharge.
Permanent
Grande wall
Precast concrete block wall consisting of modular block concrete facings used without soil reinforcement to function as an externally stabilized gravity wall.
Suitable for cut and fill up to retained heights of 1.8 m to 2 m tall wall with no live load surcharge.
Permanent
Gabion Wall
Composed of orthogonal wire cages or baskets tied together and filled with rock fragments.
Suitable for cut and up to retained heights of 3 m.
Permanent
11.3.17Design Life 
The design life of retaining walls shall be consistent with the requirements of PA Schedule C-6 Clause A.3.5 and the minimum design life values provided in Table 11-3.
Table 11-3: Minimum Design Life of Retaining Walls
Type of Retaining Wall
Design Life Required (years)
New permanent roadway retaining walls
75
New permanent railway retaining walls
100
New temporary retaining walls
5
11.3.18Parking Areas 
The total number of permanent parking stalls, including the total number of electrified and oversized stalls, shall be established for each project based on the projected number for plant employees and visitors. 
Each designated parking area shall: 
1.Be of adequate size to ensure safe parking of the largest vehicle being used,
2.Have a clearly defined perimeter,
3.Be provided with lighting according to the requirements of the DRM, the municipal standards, or by the IESNA,
4.Be designed to prevent collision with other parked vehicles and mobile equipment,
5.Provide a physical barrier to separate light vehicles and mobile equipment (where applicable),
6.Incorporate safe pedestrian routes (including pedestrian access points and pedestrian travel routes) to and from buildings and other work areas,
7.Incorporate signage that is clearly visible and used to control, warn, and instruct personnel,
8.Show maximum speed limit signage (e.g., 10 km/hr),
9.Show traffic flow direction and parking location,
10.Provide accessibility parking.
Parking areas shall conform to the geometric criteria provided by the stakeholder requirements as per Section Error! Reference source not found.. In the absence or non-applicability of the stakeholder requirements, the parking area shall consider its functional use (i.e., laydown) and local municipal or provincial guidelines and recommendations as per Section 5.1.
11.3.19Roadside Barriers
Roadside safety barriers, such as guardrails, berms, safety berms, or jersey barriers, shall be provided:
1.Along roads or trafficable areas near water bodies or other hazardous locations,
2.Along roads or trafficable areas where more than ten (10) ft drop-off exists at the edge of the road or having a backslope steeper than 3H:1V due to increased overturning risk,
3.Where horizontal distance from the edge of a travelled lane to an obstruction is less than 3.5 ft.
11.3.20Design Loading
All buried or underground infrastructure (i.e., pipe, utility cables, foundations, culverts, etc.) shall be designed for the governing design scenario from the following:
As per PA Schedule C-6 Clause A.11.1 (e), all trackside elements placed within the trackway shall be designed to withstand the worst-case loading of an emergency vehicle. Any facilities providing emergency vehicular or emergency personnel access to the trackway shall be designed to accommodate emergency vehicles, personnel, and equipment adequately and safely, to address both vehicular and personnel entry points into the track.
Any below-grade structures directly or indirectly subject to railroad loading and train live load surcharge. As per PA Schedule C-6 Clause B.3.1 (c), the train live load surcharge shall be based on Cooper E-80 loading in compliance with the AREMA Manual, Volume 2 – Structures, unless otherwise superseded by requirements identified in the GTTS.
During operations, any buried structure shall be designed to withstand the design load of the expected maintenance vehicle(s) and equipment(s) that will frequent the area of concern.
During construction, any buried asset shall consider the worse-case loading of any construction-related vehicle or heavy equipment (i.e., crane, truck, loader, back-hoe, pile driver, etc.) and mitigations provided to maintain the structural integrity of the asset.
11.3.21Non-Trafficable Areas
Non-trafficable areas within the plant site are defined as areas not developed. Non-trafficable areas shall be left “as-is”, unless otherwise approved by CJV.
11.4Inputs and Outputs
The civil earthwork activities will involve input and coordination from several disciplines of the project scope. Table 11-4 displays the design inputs and outputs of the civil team throughout the design process.
Table 11-4: Civil Earthworks – Design Inputs and Outputs
Item No.
Item Description
Input/Output
1
Review of Existing As-built and Reference Documents and Drawings
Input
2
Topographical and Legal Survey
Input
3
Coordination with Other Disciplines:
Input
3a
Geotechnical Investigation Report
Input
3b
Environmental Management Plan and Soil Contamination Report
Input
3c
Track Layout, Alignment, and Geometry
Input
3d
Location of Utilities and Cable Containment
Input
3e
Location and Alignment of Retaining Walls
Input
3f
Design of Stormwater Infrastructure
Input
3h
Location of Structure Foundations
Input
4
Construction Specifications
Output
5
Produce Civil Reports
Output
6
Perform Civil Calculations
Output
7
Produce Civil Drawings:
Output
7a
Civil Layout Drawings
Output
7b
Site-wide Safety and Fencing Plan Drawings
Output
7c
Grading Plan Drawings
Output
7d
Existing Conditions and Removals Plan
Output
7e
Excavation Plans
Output
7f
Laydown Areas
Output
7g
Civil Details and Sections Drawings
Output
7h
Construction Staging Drawings
Output
8
Generate MD3, MD2, MDR, and Navisworks Civil Models:
Output
8a
Grading Model
Output
8b
Excavation Model
Output
8c
Fencing Model 
Output
9
Material Take Off Estimate
Output
10
Permits, Licenses and Approval from Municipalities
Output
12.Drainage & Stormwater Management (SWM)
The following sections provide the general design requirements for the design and construction of drainage and stormwater management infrastructure and to support the construction and operations of various facilities. Based on the Project Agreement (PA), the Stormwater Management Plans shall be in accordance with municipal and Governmental Authority requirements for all drainage and stormwater management aspects of the initial works.
12.1Drainage Scope of Work
The corridor stormwater management design relates to the conveyance of stormwater from the ROW to an identified outfall (i.e., natural watercourse, municipal sewer) via surface or subsurface means. Stormwater infrastructure includes but not limited to catch basins, subdrains, and swales/ditches, are provided within the corridor to convey stormwater away from the ballast/sub-ballast, platforms, and structural foundations. Longitudinal and transverse drainage assets in the form of culverts and pipes will convey stormwater across the tracks where required. Both water quality and quantity targets will be reached using stormwater management infrastructure in accordance with the provincial and municipal requirements.
12.2Design Approach
The general approach for the drainage design is to mitigate major cost/design risks for the discipline by starting design studies based on the best available information. These concept design studies will help guide the discipline modelling and coordination and lay the groundwork for future model development later in design development. The goal by the end of the phase is to generate drainage models through multidisciplinary design input that satisfy project and regulatory requirements. 
12.3Design Standards 
The stormwater management design criteria shall be developed in accordance with the criteria mentioned in Project Agreement (PA) and following the applicable local authorities. Relevant standards and guidelines related to drainage and stormwater management design are provided in Table 6-1 and Table 6-2: Standards and Guidelines
ID
Name
CN
Canadian National Railway
CN [1]
Guidelines for Design of Railway Structures
CN [2]
Manual of Practice for the Maintenance of Railway Structures
CN [3]
Standard Practice Circular (SPC) 4402, Culverts
COT
City of Toronto
COT [1]
City of Toronto – Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains
COT [2]

City of Toronto – Transportation Services Road Engineering Design Guidelines
COT [3]
City of Toronto – Transportation Services Multi-use Trail Design Guidelines
COT [4]
Toronto Complete Streets Guidelines – Street Design for Cycling
COT [5]
City of Toronto Development Infrastructure Policy & Standards for Public Local Residential Streets and Private Streets
COT [6]
City of Toronto Multi-use Path Design Guidelines
GO-DRM-STD
GO Design Requirements Manual
IESNA
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
MX DS-02
Universal Design Standard
MX DS-03
Wayfinding Design Standard
MX DS-04
GO Station Design Standard
MX DGL-02
Vegetative Screens v1.1
OPS
Ontario Provincial Standard for Road and Public Works
OPSS
Ontario Provincial Standard Specifications
OPSD
Ontario Provincial Standard Drawings
RC-0506-02TRK
GO Transit Track Standards
RC-0506-04STR
Metrolinx General Guidelines for Design of Railway Bridges and Structures
TADG
Toronto Accessibility Design Guidelines
TRCA 
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority
TRCA [1]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Stormwater Management Criteria
TRCA & CVC [2]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Low Impact Development Stormwater Management Planning and Design Guide
TRCA [3]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Planning and Development Procedural Manual
TRCA [4]
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority Erosion and Sediment Control Guide for Urban Construction
WWFMG
Wet Weather Flow Management Guidelines
-
City of Markham – Engineering Design Criteria
-
York Region – Road Design Guidelines
13.Safety Assurance
Safe solutions are part of our core value, thus will be embedded in all design aspects related to the Infrastructure Civil Works. The design process will ensure compliance to applicable codes, regulations, standards, as well as project specific safety requirements.
.
Table 13-1 highlights the Municipalities and Conservation Authorities that each corridor lies within in different areas. Figure 13-1 shows the boundaries of Conservation Authorities in the region and the alignment of subject Corridors.
Table 13-1: Conservation Authorities and Municipalities covered by Corridors
Newmarket Corridor
Conservation Authority
Municipality (3)
Chainage
Toronto and Region (1)
City of Toronto
NM 4+750 – NM 20+775

City of Vaughan
NM 20+775 – NM 35+820

Township of King
NM 35+820 – NM 42+650

City of Aurora
NM 42+650 – NM 50+775
Lake Simcoe Region (2)
Town of Newmarket
NM 50+775 – NM 56+940

Town of East Gwillimbury
NM 56+940 – NM 63+825

Township of King
NM 63+825 – NM 66+000

Town of Bradford West Gwillimbury
NM 66+000 – NM 76+800

Town of Innisfil
NM 76+800 – NM 94+100

City of Barrie
NM 94+100 – NM 101+629
Kingston Corridor
Toronto and Region
City of Toronto
KN 2+750 – KN 28+500

City of Pickering
KN 28+500 – KN 36+900

Town of Ajax
KN 36+900 – KN 41+450
Central Lake Ontario
Town of Ajax
KN 41+450 – KN 42+800

Town of Whitby
KN 42+800 – KN 50+575

City of Oshawa
KN 50+575 – KN 50+915
Oakville Corridor
Toronto and Region
City of Toronto
OA 2+100 – OA 15+800

City of Mississauga
OA 15+800 – OA 16+200
Credit Valley
City of Mississauga
OA 16+200 – OA 28+850

Town of Oakville
OA 28+850 – OA 29+925
Halton Region
Town of Oakville
OA 29+925 – OA 43+390

City of Burlington
OA 43+390 – Mile 36.8
Hamilton Region
City of Burlington
Mile 36.8 – Mile 36.9

City of Hamilton
Mile 36.9 – Mile 38.1
Weston-Guelph Corridor
Toronto and Region
City of Toronto
BRAM 3+100 – BRAM 21+675

City of Mississauga
BRAM 21+675 – BRAM 26+600

City of Brampton
BRAM 26+600 – Mile 15.75
Credit Valley
City of Brampton
Mile 15.75 – Mile 21.15

Town of Halton Hills
Mile 21.15 – Mile 37.75
Grand River
Town of Halton Hills
Mile 37.75 – Mile 38.18

Town of Milton
Mile 38.18 – Mile 38.23

Township of Guelph/Erimosa
Mile 38.23 – Mile 46

City of Guelph
Mile 46 – Mile 51.6

Township of Guelph/Erimosa
Mile 51.6 – Mile 54.37

Township of Woolwich
Mile 54.37 – Mile 58.7

City of Kitchener
Mile 58.7 – Mile 63.4
Milton Corridor
Toronto and Region
City of Toronto
Mile 4.5 – Mile 11.8

City of Mississauga
Mile 11.8 – Mile 12.58
Credit Valley
City of Mississauga
Mile 12.58 – Mile 24.85
Halton Region
City of Mississauga
Mile 24.85 – Mile 26.1

Town of Milton
Mile 26.1 – Mile 31.1
Niagara Corridor
Hamilton Region
City of Hamilton
Mile 43.7 – Mile 31.2
Niagara Peninsula
Town of Grimsby
Mile 31.2 – Mile 25.08

Town of Lincoln
Mile 25.08 – Mile 14.78

City of St Catherines
Mile 14.78 – Mile 8.3

City of Thorold
Mile 8.3 – Mile 7.8

City of Niagara Falls
Mile 7.8 – Mile 0.5
Union Corridor
Toronto and Region
City of Toronto
Union Station
Bala Corridor
Toronto and Region
City of Toronto
BA 2+550 – BA 24+400

City of Markham
BA 24+400 – BA 29+500

City of Richmond Hill
BA 29+500 – BA 46+500
Stouffville Corridor
Toronto and Region
City of Toronto
UXB 13+350 – UXB 26+580

City of Markham
UXB 26+580 – UXB 44+275

Town of Whitchurch-Stouffville
UXB 44+275 – UXB 49+000
Note: The values in red are milage as the chainage is missing at these locations.  

Figure 13-1: Conservation Authorities Regulatory Boundaries
13.1Design Methodology
The stormwater design within the corridor requires understanding of the pre-development and post-development conditions. The design methodology for the stormwater network will vary based on municipality, location, and site-specific design constraints but will generally be consistent with the following steps:
1.Review municipal, provincial, and/or site-specific reference documents/drawings,
2.Perform site visit investigations (if required),
3.Coordinate grading with Civil team and input from other disciplines,
4.Analyze pre-development and post-development conditions to determine time of concentration,
5.Determine design rainfall and calculate peak runoff for the major and minor storms,
6.Size stormwater infrastructure to meet water quality, quantity, and water balance requirements, 
7.Determine outfall locations (i.e., natural watercourses, municipal sewers, etc.),
8.Produce proposed drainage models and drawings,
9.Prepare stormwater management plan and calculation reports,
10.Permitting application and process with municipalities.
13.2Design Criteria
In recognizing the standards and requirements within each study area, the drainage and stormwater management criteria shall be developed to provide safe conveyance and handling of runoff from the proposed site. Stormwater management has three objectives: water quality, water quantity, and water balance. The following sections provide the overall methodology that shall be used to establish the best SWM strategy to meet the required criteria and standards.   
13.2.1Design Rainfall
To assess the hydrological conditions of each site, rainfall data shall be developed based on the site specific IDF curve parameters obtained from the nearest weather station to the project location. It should be noted that certain townships and municipalities that the corridors are located in have their own requirements for rainfall gauges that needs to be considered in the design, as an example; the City of Barrie and the Town of Innisfil recommend using Barrie WPCC station (ID# 6110557) whereas the Town of Newmarket suggests using the Pearson Airport station (ID# 6158731). 
In an absence of site-specific rain gauge station within local authorities, rainfall depth and rainfall intensity shall be obtained from the Ministry of Transportation (MTO) IDF Curve Lookup website. If required, other supplementary tools (e.g., Western University IDF curve tool) will be used for IDF curve interpolation and climate change considerations. The delineation of areas in which rainfall IDF data applies shall be determined by the Engineer based on the best available nearby data and standard engineering practice.
An example set of rainfall depth and rainfall intensity information for the Toronto City weather station (Pearson International Airport) retrieved from MTO IDF Curve Lookup.
Table 13-2: Rainfall Depth (mm) for Toronto City Weather Station (Pearson Int.)
Return Period
Duration

5-min
10-min
15-min
30-min
1-hr
2-hr
6-hr
12-hr
24-hr
2-yr
10.3
12.7
14.4
17.7
21.8
26.9
37.4
46.1
56.7
5-yr
13.6
16.7
18.9
23.3
28.7
35.4
49.2
60.6
74.7
10-yr
15.8
19.4
21.9
27.0
33.3
41.0
57.1
70.4
86.7
25-yr
18.5
22.7
25.7
31.7
39.0
48.0
66.9
82.4
101.5
50-yr
20.5
25.3
28.5
35.1
43.3
53.3
74.3
91.5
112.7
100-yr
22.5
27.7
31.3
38.6
47.5
58.5
81.5
100.4
123.6

Table 13-3: Rainfall Intensity (mm/hr) for Toronto City Weather Station (Pearson Int.)
Return Period
Duration

5-min
10-min
15-min
30-min
1-hr
2-hr
6-hr
12-hr
24-hr
2-yr
123.8
76.3
57.5
35.4
21.8
13.4
6.2
3.8
2.4
5-yr
163.0
100.4
75.6
46.6
28.7
17.7
8.5
5.1
3.1
10-yr
189.1
116.5
87.8
54.1
33.3
20.5
9.5
5.9
3.6
25-yr
221.5
136.5
102.8
63.3
39.0
24.0
11.1
6.9
4.2
50-yr
245.9
151.5
114.1
70.3
43.3
26.7
12.4
7.6
4.7
100-yr
269.8
166.2
125.2
77.1
47.5
29.3
13.6
8.4
5.2

As specified in the Project Agreement (PA) (version 5), Project Co shall design and implement the necessary drainage and stormwater management systems to keep infrastructure free from damage due to flooding for all storms up to and including the 100-Year plus Climate Change storm utilizing current Municipal rainfall Intensity-Duration-Frequency (IDF) parameters. 
As per PA Schedule A-9 clause 7.1(b)(i), a Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment will be produced and shall govern the Climate Change factored IDF data for the design of stormwater infrastructure.
13.2.2Flooding
The extent of potential surface flooding should be analyzed for both the existing condition and the proposed condition. Where required by local authorities, flood mapping of hydraulic models should be prepared to show the depth and area for the full range of storm events (2, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100-year and 100-year plus Climate Change factor). As deemed necessary based on PA Schedule C-6 requirements, it is required to not increase the flood risk to adjacent properties and where applicable, to reduce the baseline number of flood vulnerable areas within the railway corridor. In the case of approaching the floodplain, local authority’s standards shall be followed. 
Regulatory flooding delineations will be obtained by consultation with the relevant conservation authorities and other authorities having jurisdiction. 
In addition to surface flooding evaluation and following the municipal requirements, a hydraulic grade line analysis of proposed storm sewers may be required to confirm there are no sewer flooding as a result of the proposed works. Typically, HGL (Hydraulic Grade Line) Analysis of the drainage network shall be undertaken from the 2-year event up to the 100-year event in pre and post development conditions. 
13.2.3Extreme Events
Extreme events may include severe heat, severe cold, or severe precipitation. Severe precipitation shall be covered through the application of a climate change uplift to flows based on the project design life. Following PA Schedule C-6 requirements, local authorities, federal and government regulations, all site information is subject to climate change adjustments based on the Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment.
13.2.4Water Quality Control
Water quality requirements shall be subject to the requirements of local municipalities, conservation authorities, and MECP. 
Quality control objectives will be achieved through a variety of Stormwater Management (SWM) techniques within the right-of-way, including LID features and other Best Management Practices (BMPs), where applicable. Design of these features will be undertaken in accordance with the appropriate MECP guidance documents (i.e., Draft LID Stormwater Management Guidance Manual, 2022) and the TRCA/CVC LID (Low Impact Development) Design Guide where required.
All guideway drainage will be captured and managed within the ROW with stormwater management facilities that provide attenuation up to the 100-year storm with water quality protection for new additional impervious area. At a minimum, the runoff shall meet the water quality requirements from MECP Stormwater Management Planning and Design Manual. Additional water quality control may require based on the site location and the local standards. As an example, Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority required 80% Phosphorus reduction in any major development within their jurisdiction. Site specific, water quality requirements shall be reviewed and confirmed by CJV and local authorities.  Outlet locations and specific SWM approaches will vary throughout the project location, as defined by constraints and opportunities in each catchment area. 
13.2.5Water Quantity Control
Water quantity requirements shall be subject to the requirements of local municipalities and conservation authorities. As per the PA, the track drainage system design for stormwater rainfall and runoff volumes must be in compliance with the AREMA Manual, (Chapter 1, Part 3.2). 
Quantity control will be provided by controlling stormwater runoff from project areas, as required to satisfy allowable peak discharge rates. These allowable release rates vary throughout project areas dependent on the nature of the receiving systems. For example, where project drainage systems are discharging into existing City of Toronto municipal storm sewers the release rate will be calculated based on the lesser of pre-development 2-year peak flow rate or the capacity of existing sewers. Where connections are being made to natural watercourses, or existing culverts, target release rates will be to match equivalent pre-development peak flow rates following local standards. This will be assessed on a location-by-location basis and based on local municipalities and CAs requirements.
Flows to the minor system will be restricted following requirements within municipal guidelines to ensure the receiving storm sewers does not adversely affect the existing level of service in terms of flood protection and minor system performance. During 100-year rainfall events (which will exceed the capacity of the minor system), use of inlet control devices (ICDs), holding tanks, infiltration retrofits (e.g., trenches and basins), LID components and BMPs will be considered (where applicable) to limit flow into pipes causing excess flow to stay at the surface (to the max. allowable depth) where it is controlled and conveyed overland.
If there are no outlets available for the major system, flow storage areas may be created to detain the water and allow it to flow back to the minor system once the flow subsides, thus reducing the risk of surface flooding. Excess flows will be conveyed via the guideway, streets, open channels and walkways to a municipality approved public outlet, in accordance with the local municipalities Sewer Guidelines. 
13.2.6Water Balance
Water balance requirements shall be subject to the requirements of local municipalities and conservation authorities. At a minimum, the runoff shall meet the water balance requirements from MECP Stormwater Management Planning and Design Manual.
The impact of urban development on the subsurface portion of hydrologic cycle needs to be evaluated and considered in the design to minimize the impact on recharge reduction. If the site is located in a sensitive ecological area, site specific water balance assessment may be required and as per local guidelines. The water holding capacity, soil group, precipitation, evapotranspiration, runoff, and infiltration needs to be considered following the MECP guideline or other local requirements to account for water balance in the design process. 
13.2.7Conveyance
13.2.8New Storm Sewers
New storm sewers will be designed as per local municipalities requirements using standard engineering practice. In an absence of local sewer standards, Chapter 3 in the City of Toronto Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains will be followed. In addition to local standards, where applicable, AREMA and Metrolinx criteria will also be consider. As per the City of Toronto Design Criteria, the minimum allowable size for storm sewers is 300 mm and the velocity shall be within 0.6 m–s - 6 m/s. The design approach for new storm sewer system will be based on municipal and provincial guidelines (wherever applicable) and based on standard conservative engineering practices, examples of storm sewer design approaches are (not limited to); Rational Method (for catchment areas of less than 40 hectares), Manning formula to define sewer capacities, and dynamic sewer computer models (e.g., PCSWMM, InfoWorks). Level of service of the sewer design will depend on the road classification which is described in tables within Chapter 3 of the City of Toronto Guidelines. 
13.2.9Culverts and Bridges
In line with the PA, MTO and AREMA guidelines, culvert levels should be assessed against a 100-year event and shall have a minimum pipe diameter of 610 mm (24”). Additionally, the climate change allowance of 25% will be applied to the estimated flows to account for the infrastructure design life. It should be noted that the MTO standards are only referred to where we do not have information from applicable PA Schedule C-6 or other provincial/local standards. The MTO standards provide guidance for highways although this has been used to design the rail to the same standard as freeways or urban arterial roads. On Regulated Watercourses the Regulatory Flow shall be calculated in all cases where Flood Mapping is available, where there is a potential risk to public safety, or where there is potential damage to adjacent properties.
The highway guidance of Standard WC-1 of the MTO Drainage Design Standards states that the return period used for the design flows of the bridges is determined based on the length of the bridge span. Similarly, to the culvert analysis, bridges will be assessed against a 100-year event with a climate change uplift of 25% applied to account for the infrastructure life. Standard WC-2 within the MTO Drainage Design Standards highlights the freeboard and clearance requirements for bridge crossings. Whilst this standard identifies the soffit clearance and freeboard for bridges carrying roads over water bodies, the principals can also be applied to rail. The standard also identifies the Freeboard requirement for walkways, bikeways and maintenance roads that are constructed under a bridge.
13.2.10Natural Streams and Watercourses
Natural watercourses may be diverted only under a Letter of Advice or Authorization from Fisheries and Oceans Canada and if provincial Species at Risk are present approval from the Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Parks if such letters, authorizations, or permits are required. Channel realignment or channel restoration upstream or downstream of a water crossing that will alter the storage or discharge characteristics upstream of the crossing, shall be designed to meet the design standards of the crossing and conditions of approvals. 
Runoff may not be diverted from one watershed to another. This is in violation of common law, regardless of how minor the change in drainage pattern may be. Where the track traverses rugged terrain on alternating cuts and fills, diversions of minor amounts of water from one watershed to another may be justified if substantial cost savings can be achieved and if future claims or adverse environmental impacts are unlikely. In any case the affected municipality and conservation authority or Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources should be consulted regarding a change in drainage areas.
If any dewatering of natural watercourses is necessary, the process shall follow Schedule A-9 Environmental Obligations, the site-specific Groundwater Management and Dewatering Plan and required sediment and erosion control plans shall be prepared based on relevant standards and OPSS and the site-specific Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
13.2.11Sediment and Erosion Control
Sediment and Erosion Control (ESC) requirements shall be subject to the requirements of local municipalities and conservation authorities. At a minimum, the runoff shall meet the erosion control requirements from MECP Stormwater Management Planning and Design Manual.
Stormwater control, mitigation, and ESC measures will be implemented where appropriate for the urban context of the project to ensure deleterious substances and other pollutants do not leave the site and enter watercourses or the municipal drainage infrastructure. ESC Plan for the project, as a component plan of the Environmental Management Plan to comply with environmental approvals and commitments and with applicable codes. In addition, site-specific ESC Plans will be developed to address local potential environmentally sensitive site conditions, including watercourse crossings, and required dewatering (e.g., cofferdams).
All ESC measures shall be inspected until vegetative restoration and ground cover have reached 80% stabilization. All new planted vegetation shall be maintained and monitored as part of the initial works during the warranty period as set out in the PA. 
13.3Design Life
The design life of drainage and stormwater infrastructure shall consider the required design life in accordance with Table A.3.1 in PA Schedule C-6 Clause A.3.5. Note that the design life of the drainage asset cannot be guaranteed and is contingent on proper maintenance of the asset. The following average expected useful life of stormwater assets is provided below for information purposes.
Table 13-4: Approximate Average Expected Useful Life of Stormwater Assets
Asset
Useful Life (years)
Stormwater drainage pump stations
35
Stormwater management facilities, stormwater management ponds and stormwater wetlands
62
Culverts (diameter < 3 m)
37
Open ditches/channels
32
Stormwater pipes (diameter < 450 mm)
70
Stormwater pipes (450 mm ≤ diameter < 1500 mm)
70
Stormwater pipes (diameter ≥ 1500 mm)
70
Note: Useful life retrieved from: Statistics Canada, Infrastructure Canada, “Average expected useful life of new publicly owned stormwater assets”, 2022-07-26.
13.4Inputs and Outputs
The inputs and outputs of the stormwater management design are provided in Table 13-5. 
Table 13-5: Drainage – Design Inputs and Outputs
Item No.
Item Description
Input/Output
1
Review of Existing As-built and Reference Documents and Drawings
Input
2
Topographical and Legal Survey
Input
3
Coordination with Other Disciplines:
Input
3a
Geotechnical Investigation Report
Input
3b
Environmental Management Plan and Soil Contamination Report
Input
3c
Track Layout, Alignment, and Geometry
Input
3d
Location of Utilities and Cable Containment
Input
3e
Location of Above Ground Structures
Input
4
Construction Specifications
Output
5
Perform Hydraulic and Hydrologic Modelling and Calculations
Output
6
Stormwater Management Report / Drainage Design Report
Output
7
Produce Stormwater Drainage Drawings:
Output
7a
Drainage (Plan, Profile, Section, Detail) Drawings
Output
7b
Erosion and Sediment Control Drawings
Output
7c
Construction Staging Drawings
Output
8
Generate MD3, MD2, MDR, Navisworks Drainage Models
Output
8a
Proposed Drainage Model
Output
8b
Erosion and Sediment Control Model
Output
9
Material Take Off Estimate
Output
10
Permits, Licenses and Approval from Municipalities
Output

14.Traffic
14.1Traffic Scope of Work
An Initial Works Traffic Management Plan, Transit Management Plan and Traffic Control Plan (IWTM) will be prepared for each site and include the following elements:
Transportation Impact Study (where required).
Traffic Management Plan documenting the approach to the accommodation and control of traffic and active transportation users through all stages of construction. This Traffic Management Plan will include a Transportation Impact Study for the works.
A Transit Management Plan documenting the approach to accommodation and control of transit service through all stages of construction.
Traffic Control Plans (TCPs).
The IWTM for each site will be submitted 20 days in advance of construction per PA requirements, noting that 80 days of advance notice will be required if modifications to Transit routes or infrastructure is required.
It is noted that electrical engineering specialty work including traffic signal design will be undertaken by others under a different work assignment and will not be identified in the IWTMs. The traffic scope listed here supporting the IWTM development will provide necessary inputs of traffic operations for this work but will not include design or modifications to traffic signal infrastructure.
14.2Design Approach
14.2.1Traffic and Transit Management Plan Objectives
The Initial Works Traffic and Transit Management Plan will seek to provide a detailed plan for the accommodation of all modes of transportation at the subject site during construction; these plans will consist of traffic control plans corresponding with the proposed design and stating concepts, supporting operational and safety analysis and provide input to traffic monitoring and incident management in the field.
The Traffic Management Plan component of the plan will include a Transportation Impact Study documenting operational analysis of the existing and proposed operations in a study area of each site to determine existing levels of traffic operations and anticipated impacts from the proposed design concepts and construction staging configurations; this analysis will be used to determine the potential for additional mitigation measures to be implemented during the construction and ultimate configurations as required. Impacts from nearby work or events that may also impact traffic will be identified to confirm the timeline of work to facilitate the coordination of traffic management between the project works and these events. The Traffic Management Plan will also provide a basis for traffic management in the field, including the provision of emergency vehicle access and response to traffic incidents during construction.
Where transit service is impacted, the Transit Management Plan component of the IWTM will be developed to provide an approach to maintaining transit service connectivity during construction and minimizing travel time variability and delays for transit service. Transit priority measures including transit signal priority will be considered as required to maintain existing transit frequencies and travel times and additional resources to accommodate route modifications (additional buses) will be identified. The IWTM and traffic control plans will highlight any modifications to transit routing, stops and facilities required during construction and locations for temporary or relocated transit stops as required. Safe, unobstructed pedestrian access to and from transit service at each site will be a key consideration of the Transit Management Plans. 
Traffic management shall be in the form of temporary and permanent pavement markings and traffic signage. Any works that may affect pedestrian, cyclist, and vehicular access in the vicinity of construction works shall have temporary signage to redirect traffic. Traffic management and control devices shall be in accordance with all relevant provincial and municipal traffic control manuals and guidelines and PA requirements. 
14.2.2Traffic Control Plan Consideration
The traffic control plans will be developed with the overall goal of maintaining connectivity and safety for road users around road segments impacted during construction. Traffic control plans will identify the proposed detour routes, lane modification configurations, and all required signage, pavement markings, traffic control and safety features to be implemented. Per PA requirements, the following considerations will apply to the development of Traffic Control Plans:
Existing posted speed limits will be maintained unless specified in the overall IWTM.
Establishing traffic and transit detour routes to primarily use arterial and collector roads and avoid additional traffic infiltration through residential areas. 
Maintaining pedestrian and cycling connectivity over the project limits with continuous sidewalks on both sides of impacted roadways. New sidewalks will be in compliance with municipal and AODA requirements, constructed across driveways and entrances as required and accommodated in the limits of the project lands. Temporary cycling facilities will be implemented in compliance with municipal requirements, including barrier-free, all-weather routes in the City of Toronto. All pedestrian and cycling facilities will be separated for work zones and protected from any interaction with construction activity.
Relocation of all municipal street furniture and amenities impacted by the proposed works.
Portable temporary traffic signals will not be used for accommodating traffic during construction. 
In the preparation of proposed traffic staging plans and the associated traffic control plans, the PA specifies restrictions for lane requirements and simultaneous lane closures on adjacent road corridors. Lane requirements are summarized in Table B-4.1 of the PA, with additional specific road corridor parings identified for these restrictions including:
Scarborough Junction – Midland Avenue and St. Clair Road
Progress Avenue – Progress Avenue and Ellesmere Road
Havendale – Midland Avenue and Kennedy Road
Huntingwood - Midland Avenue and Kennedy Road
McNaughton – Major Mackenzie Drive and Keele Street
Holland River Rail Bridge – Timothy Street and Water Street
Islington Avenue – Kipling Avenue and Weston Road
Thickson Road – maintain a minimum of one traffic lane in each direction during construction.
14.3Traffic Impact Considerations 
Potential traffic impacts associated with the construction of most structures have been considered in previous studies. The range of predicted impacts varies by location and construction traffic management scheme.
A transportation impact study based on current traffic and active modes user data will need to be undertaken to determine the impacts of lane modifications or accommodation of detour traffic and any mitigation measures that may be required such as intersection upgrades nearby to support design and construction.
Elements of the transportation impact study may include:
Operational analysis of signalized and unsignalized intersections impacted by the proposed works
Confirmation of vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian signal operation and timings as required, in compliance with relevant municipal requirements
Safety review and associated mitigation measures to accommodate vehicle and active transportation modes during construction
Temporary changes to signal timing and phasing at existing traffic signals to accommodate changes to traffic patterns during construction.
14.4Design Standards
14.4.1Highway Capacity Manual (Transportation Research Board (TRB), 2022)
The Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) 6th Edition methodology is used in Trafficware’s Synchro software for analyzing and optimizing signalized and unsignalized intersections. The HCM, developed by the Transportation Research Board, provides consistent techniques for evaluating highway and street facility performance, level of service and capacity. The 2000 edition was used for intersections not compatible with the 6th Edition methodology due to unsupported geometric and signal parameters.
14.4.2Municipal Guidelines for the Traffic Impact Studies and Traffic Analysis
Each municipality has its own guidelines and protocols for undertaking traffic impact studies and the associated analysis parameters and criteria. Whilst the overall approach is similar across jurisdictions, the current relevant guidelines for each location will be referenced. Structures that will impact road operations during their construction are located in the following municipalities: City of Toronto, York Region, City of Vaughan.
14.4.3Ontario Traffic Manuals
The collection of Ontario Traffic Manuals provides Ontario-specific methodology for a number of elements of traffic accommodation, control and signage. Of particular note for this project will be OTM Books 5 (Regulatory Signage), Book 6 (Advisory Signage), Book 7 (Temporary Conditions), Book 12 (Traffic Signals), Book 12A (Bicycle Signals), Book 15 (Pedestrian Crossing Facilities), and Book 18 (Cycling Facilities). 
14.5Design Methodology
The last several years have demonstrated significant changes in travel patterns, particularly mode choice and time of day / day of week peaks. It is therefore necessary to carry out a transportation impact analysis based on current data to establish and understanding of the impacts of this project on the network and community.
14.5.1Data Collection
The latest turning movement counts including pedestrians and cyclists will be required. Where counts more recent than 2021 are not available, these will need to be undertaken. Signal timings for intersections near to each site will need to be sourced from the municipality. 
14.5.2Existing Traffic Operations
Analysis of the existing conditions and current operations will be conducted at the intersection using Synchro 11 software to understand and benchmark existing traffic operations.
14.5.3Future Traffic Operations during Construction
The purpose of this assessment is to determine potential impacts during construction. This assessment will include the following:
Analysis of the future baseline traffic operation performance.
Analysis of the future baseline traffic operation during construction.
Analysis of the future traffic operation post construction.
The analysis will be carried using Synchro 11. Analysis will be undertaken for intersections impacts by the proposed works as well as intersections with proposed access roads used during construction. Analysis will include any existing and new signalized intersections implemented during construction, as well as impacts from lane modifications and detour traffic that will be required during construction.
15.At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
15.1Roadway Scope of Work
All roadway scope within the Corridors – Civil Infrastructure Line Works is focused on at-grade crossings of the railway including public or private road or pathway crossings where there will be modifications to the number or tracks or existing track alignment. These grade road and pathway crossings will require modifications to address the changes to track. Modifications will include a new crossing surface, regrading and surfacing. Some locations may require offsite access or roadway modification if the access or roadway is located within 30 m of the track. This could include access/road closure, relocation or signalization.
The at-grade crossings will be designed in accordance with the relevant crossing design standards and will tie into the existing cross sections of the approaching roadway or pathway.
General design criteria, regulations and standards will be presented in this section of this Basis of Design document. Site specific design criteria for each crossing may be obtained from the relevant municipality as the design unfolds.
15.2Location, Chainage and Site Conditions
The location, chainage and existing conditions of each at-grade crossing were generally identified in the pursuit phase. Due to the size of the document, the location, chainage, existing conditions and proposed crossing concept will be completed as an initial step in the design exercise. This will also permit time for the CJV and track team to finalize the rail concept at each crossing location to set the final scope.
15.3Design Aspects of Construction Stage
It is anticipated that construction will be undertaken when the road and pathways are fully closed, however, where public access is provided safety measures will be provided in accordance with AODA where necessary. Schedule/timing of closures will be noted for consideration by CJV when the CJV prepares the construction schedule for coordination with other planned works. 
Construction activities will limit impacts to public access. The minimum number of lanes to remain open during construction will meet requirements in the Schedule C-6, or where there are no specified requirements, the number of lanes will match the existing number of lanes.
A bus bay or dedicated right turn lane will be provided for roads with a bus route, where a roadway is reduced to one lane in one direction.
Adequate lateral clearances from detour barriers will be provided to allow emergency vehicles to pass. Unfinished roadway pavement surfaces open to traffic will be designed to accommodate traffic in an interim condition if they are opened to traffic prior to completion.
By November 30th of each calendar year:
Base asphalt will be completed
Maintenance holes and catch basins will be flush with asphalt
Temporary line painting is complete.
15.4Design Approach
The general design approach for all at-grade crossings will follow the most recent edition of regulations and standards from Transport Canada and design requirements from the appropriate municipality. The Roads team intends to work collaboratively with the other disciplines to resolve issues of mutual interest or concern and seek feedback and support from the affected municipality on the design solution. An QA review will be undertaken which will ensure that the applicable regulatory and design requirements have been met. The roads team will have to work closely with the Rail team to ensure the design does not conflict with the applicable Transport Canada Grade Crossing Regulations and Standards. 
It is expected that there may be common design elements or activities for many crossings. The roads team will consider an option to apply design template solutions with a view to limiting duplication to the degree possible.
15.5Design Standards
The roadway design criteria as outlined in PA Schedule C-6 will be based upon the specific design standards as follows:
Municipal Standards.
Reference Documents issued by MTO.
MTO Roadside Design Manual (2020).
TAC Geometric Design Guide for Canadian Roads.
AASHTO supplementary standards for road alignment and pavement design.
The regulatory environment for the rail grade crossings for the project is embodied in Transport Canada Grade Crossing Regulations (GCR) and Transport Canada Grade Crossing Standards (GCS). 
Design criteria for the affected roads or pathways will also be governed by the relevant municipality’s engineering standards. The relevant municipality’s design vehicle(s) will be used for design work. 
Continuous sidewalks will be provided on both sides of the roadway for each at-grade crossing to be constructed/reconstructed. Sidewalks and secondary pathways will be barrier free and designed to drain and eliminate water accumulation. 
Pedestrian, cyclist, vehicular and transit facilities will tie into existing facilities. All municipal street furniture will be relocated.
The design will meet public access requirements in Schedule A-11.
Intersection layouts will match existing conditions unless otherwise specified in Schedule C-6. Curb radii will be minimized.
The primary GO Transit design standards (aside from Transport Canada’s regulations and standards) affecting each grade crossing is the GO Transit Track Standards, Appendix U. The crossing surface material type required for each crossing shall be determined based on the AADT (#Trucks and #Cars) and the MGT (Million Gross Tons) from the trains over the crossing.  The chart and table below are used to aid in determining the crossing surface based on this data.

Figure 15-1: GO Transit Track Standards Appendix U – May 2018

Per Transport Canada Grade Crossings Regulations, the crossing surface design is the responsibility of the road authority.  The approach surface treatment for each crossing will generally match the existing road surface but will be confirmed in conjunction with the local municipality and Metrolinx.
Per Transport Canada Grade Crossings Standards, the maximum gradients for road approaches must not exceed the following:
ratio of 1:50 (2 per cent) within 8 m of the nearest rail and 1:20 (5 per cent) for 10 m beyond, at public grade crossings for vehicular use,
ratio of 1:50 (2 per cent) within 8 m of the nearest rail and 1:10 (10 per cent) for 10 m beyond, at private grade crossings for vehicular use,
ratio of 1:50 (2 per cent) within 5 m of the nearest rail at a sidewalk, path, or trail,
ratio of 1:100 (1 per cent) within 5 m of the nearest rail at a sidewalk, path or trail designated by the road authority for use by persons having assistive devices.
Bicycle facilities will be governed by the Bike Infrastructure Standard at the following link: www.gosite.ca/engineering_public/DesignStandards/DS-07 Bike Infrastructure Standard_v1.1_20190716.pdf.
All proposed surfaces to transition smoothly between proposed and existing facilities.
15.6Primary Design Issues
Transport Canada grade crossing regulations (GCRs) and standards (GCSs) generally regard two broad areas of application:
The physical layout of the crossing
The degree of protection required.
15.6.1Physical Layout
The major issues to be considered under physical layout include:
The provision of adequate sight distances for uncontrolled crossings
Separation distance requirements for driveways and intersections from crossings
Need to accommodate non-vehicular crossing traffic (sidewalks, mup)
Potential conflicts with adjacent intersection signalization
Potential changes to the roadway cross-sections to accommodate traffic projected for the year 2055 design horizon.
15.6.2Degree of Protection
The degree of protection for grade rail crossings ranges from unsignalized crossings (crossbucks and stop sign) to signalization with Flashing Lights Bells & Gates (FLBG).  The primary determinant for the degree of protection is the cross-product of rail traffic and road traffic for the 2055 design year. Secondary determinants can be sightline issues and non-vehicular traffic requirements. 
15.7Design Methodology
In general, the design methodology for road works will include the following tasks:
1.Review all roadway and pedestrian engineering reference documents,
2.Conduct a Grade Crossing Safety Assessment and establish a summary report, which would include a table of existing and proposed conditions for all crossings,
3.Review site specific design criteria from municipalities (if any),
4.Perform site visit and survey,
5.Identify site or design constraints,
6.Develop construction specifications,
7.Develop design and layout,
8.Support overall Transportation Impact Study respecting individual grade crossing sites in accordance with PA Schedule C-6, Part A.8.3,
9.Develop Initial Works Traffic Management Plan in accordance with Schedule C-2 and A-18,
10.Review design, staging and traffic management with municipality,
11.Develop model in BIM,
12.Develop quantity estimate.
15.8Design Life
Road infrastructure shall consider the required design life as per Table A.3.1 in PA Schedule C-6 Clause A.3.5. Note that the design life of the road infrastructure cannot be guaranteed and is contingent on proper maintenance and rehabilitation of the asset. The design structure for each roadway or pathway will be based on the design life and performance specifications provided by the relevant municipality. The design roadway structure will, at a minimum, match the existing approach roadway or pathway structure. 
15.9Inputs and Outputs
The following is a general summary of expected inputs and outputs required for each grade crossing. 
Item No.
Item Description
Input/Output
1
Track number, alignment, elevation established
Input
2
Final pavement design memo
Input
3
Final geotechnical investigation results
Input
4
Updated topographic survey
Input
5
Transportation Impact Study and Recommendations for detours or diversions
Input
6
Environmental license and permitting conditions (final or anticipated)
Input
7
Final R/W limits (where applicable)
Input
8
Finalized utility conflict relocation or protection plan
Input
9
Finalized Drainage Report
Input
10
Consent of Design elements from municipality
Input
11
Grade Crossing Safety Assessment Report
Construction Specification
Output
12
E4 – Plan Profile Design
Output
13
Notice of Railway Works to Transport Canada (Public Crossings Only)
Output
14
Complete BIM Model
Output
15
Material Take Off
Output
16
Detour Drawings
Output
17
Construction Specifications
Output
18
Roadway Drawings (if required)
Output
19
Confirmation of final design with municipality
Output

15.10Other Notes
It is expected that an agreement document will be required governing the crossing construction, operation and maintenance between the applicable road authority (municipality, landowner, etc.) and Metrolinx.
16.References and Interfaces
This Basis of Design document shall be read in conjunction with the Basis of Design for other disciplines and project areas. Table 16-1 lists the Basis of Design documents from other disciplines which support or interface with this Basis of Design document. It is to note that the table provided below was prepared at the time of writing of this document. As such, it should be expected that other basis of design documents will need to be referred to for civil design. 
 Table 16-1: Reference Design Basis Reports
Document No.
Report Name
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00001
Basis of Design – Geo-Engineering
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00002
Basis of Design – Corridors – Cable Containment
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00003
Basis of Design – Station Renovations
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00004
Basis of Design – Corridors – Trackwork and Track Alignment
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00005
Basis of Design – Rail Facilities
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00006
Basis of Design – Traction Power Facilities
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00007
Basis of Design – Union Station
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00008
Basis of Design – New Stations
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00009
Basis of Design – Grade Separations
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00010
Basis of Design – Utilities
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-PWS-EGM-DCR-00012
Basis of Design – Electrical Grounding and Bonding
ONC-ECW-5090-SWS-ENV-DES-DCR-00001
Basis of Design – Environmental





Appendix A
Requirements Allocation for
Civil Infrastructure Line Works



The following requirements table details the items that are considered applicable at the DDD stage. Items which are not applicable to the DDD stage include “N/A” and will be addressed at the DDS stage.
Source module
Num Heading
Primary Text
Artifact Type
Applicable section(s) &
Basis of Design Document Number
Engineering Lead Comments
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.1.46
S-146 Initial Works Traffic Management Plan, Transit Management Plan and Traffic Control Plan
Requirement
Section 11 Traffic
[Roads]: Addressed in Civil Infrastructure Line Works BOD
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.1.46
Project Co shall submit designs for all Initial Works Traffic Management Plan, Transit Management Plan and Traffic Control Plan in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed.
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
13.1.2.21
Project Co shall submit the Excavation Impacts Study in accordance with the requirements set forth in Schedule C-6 – Initial Works Output Specifications.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
[Civil]: This should be under Union Station BOD
PF- April 4, Not addressed in Civil  BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (a)
(a)                Project Co shall submit an initial set of Record Drawings, As-Built Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals (“Record Drawings, As-Built Drawings and Operations and Maintenance Manuals”) to Contracting Authority for review in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.10 (f)
(f)                Project Co shall finalize the Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals where Infrastructure is not necessary for Train Service Plans (incorporating the comments from Contracting Authority) and submit final Record Drawings and operation and maintenance manuals to Contracting Authority no later than three (3) months prior to Substantial Completion.
Requirement
[AH Apr 5_23] N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.11.3 (b)
(b)                 Project Co shall ensure the Nomenclature includes a method for system-wide labeling that includes Service Group, functional description of the element, and a unique sequential identification number, with the functional description containing information related to the type of element and being an alpha numeric designation to represent the specific field element based on the Project Co system architecture.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) B. vi.     Project Co shall undertake a traffic analysis for all proposed access roads using Good Industry Practice and industry-accepted and appropriate software packages. Such traffic analysis shall include operational and safety aspects of the proposed entrance to identify any required mitigation measures and such mitigation measures shall be implemented by Project Co.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) Project Co shall provide all Initial Works for implementation of traffic signals impacted, including all underground and above ground traffic signal infrastructure, and shall be responsible for:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.1 (a)
(a)                 Project Co shall co-ordinate transportation management with Contracting Authority, the Municipalities, MTO, all Transit Providers and other Stakeholders in accordance with the procedures set out in this Schedule C-6, Section A.8 - Traffic Management and Construction Access.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.1 (b)
(b)                 Project Co shall obtain all necessary approvals for all Construction Activities that impact public access to the Municipal ROW, including private vehicle, transit, trucking, pedestrian and cyclist access.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.1 (c)
(c)                 Project Co shall minimize the impact of Construction Activities on public access to the Municipal ROW, including private vehicle, transit, trucking, pedestrian and cyclist access.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) A. Commissioning of the signals;
Requirement
[AH Apr 5_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.1 (d)
(d)                 Project Co shall coordinate Construction Activities with other planned works undertaken by Municipalities, MTO, all Transit Providers and other Stakeholders in order to minimize impacts to public access as outlined in this Section A.8.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section. BUT is not a Traffic responsibility / area of influence - belongs in Scheduling / Coordination… somewhere about broader project planning
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.2 (b)
(b)               Project Co shall be responsible for providing road closure, temporary bus stops and construction progress information to the Municipalities, Transit Providers, MTO, 407 ETR, Contracting Authority and the media for the purposes of public notification, public consultation and meetings with relevant Stakeholders.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) B. connection and integration of all Municipal traffic controllers, IT cabinet and traffic signal devices to the Municipal traffic centre(s) via PSN in compliance with the Municipal IT Cabinets at Outdoor Traffic/Transit/IoT Locations Requirements. This includes fibre, conduits and ducts from the IT cabinet to the PSN fibre network nearest splice point for traffic signals IP communications;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.2 (d)
(d)               Project Co shall incorporate local community and political public events that may affect the Initial Works in accordance with Schedule A-12 - Communication and Public Engagement.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) C. integration with any existing TSP system, if applicable;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (a)
(ii)               Where existing public access cannot be safely provided through a Site, Project Co shall make an alternate route around the Site available prior to and throughout the duration of the impacted period.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (a)
(iii)             Where a route is provided through a Site, Project Co shall provide safety measures sufficient to ensure the safety of all Site users including vehicles, cyclists, pedestrians, workers and equipment, in accordance with AODA requirements.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (a)
(iv)             Project Co and all Project Co Parties on this Project shall be responsible for obeying all parking regulations.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (a)
(v)             Project Co shall prepare and submit a transportation impact study (“Transportation Impact Study”) for the Initial Works in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure and in accordance with the Municipal transportation impact study guidelines for the Road Authority acceptance. The Transportation Impact Study shall as a minimum:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (a)
(v) A. assess the effects of the major stages of construction on operations of the municipal transportation network;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (a)
(v) B. enable the develop appropriate transit management plans to mitigate impacts on transportation mobility around a Construction Activity and Site; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (a)
(v) C. enable the development of appropriate traffic control plans to mitigate impacts on transportation mobility around a Construction Activity and Site.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (b)
(i)                 Project Co shall carry out the Initial Works described in this Section A.8 in accordance with the applicable Reference Documents, and OTM Book 7.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(c)               Project Co shall prepare and submit to Contracting Authority in accordance with the requirements of Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure a traffic and transit management plan for the Initial Works (“Initial Works Traffic Management Plan, Transit Management Plan and Traffic Control Plan” or “IWTM”) in accordance with the requirements in Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure. Each IWTM shall:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] 
Content of the plan is included in Traffic section of BOD
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(i)             shall include a traffic control plan for each Site identified in the transportation impact study for the Initial Works for each construction stage where the Construction Activities impact public mobility and access to the Municipal ROW;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(ii)             be reviewed by all Road Authorities having jurisdiction over any infrastructure affected by that IWTM (All IWTMs for Lane Closures affecting existing transit routes or infrastructure will be reviewed by the relevant Transit Provider in accordance with the Transit Providers submission timelines.);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(iii)            be submitted a minimum of 20 Business Days in advance of the proposed start date of the applicable Construction Activity impacting public access to the Municipal ROW;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) D. provide traffic controller including controller cabinet hardware and Software upgrades. Project Co shall ensure that controllers are suitable for intersection operation vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle operation;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) E. installation, calibration and connection of all detection;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) F. temporary changes to signal timing and phasing on existing controllers to adjust to changing traffic stages;
Requirement
Signal Timing addressed in BOD section 7. Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – controller modifications electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) G. temporary traffic signal system hardware and Software maintenance, including any required adjustments to signal heads to maintain OTM visibility requirements; and
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(i) H. all associated programming work, controller build and testing, field implementation, field acceptance and verification.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(ii) Project Co shall replace any traffic signal infrastructure that gets damaged as a result of the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(iii) Project Co shall maintain or relocate all existing Municipal traffic cameras to comply with Municipal requirements. For clarity, Municipal traffic cameras that are relocated or modified to their permanent location shall be New Municipal Infrastructure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] Likely more electrical scope given it's part of signal plant - N/A for traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(iv) Project Co shall be responsible for each traffic signal from the time it is physically modified up to completion and handover of that permanent traffic signal to the Municipalities as New Municipal Infrastructure. This includes:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(iv) C. maintaining all traffic signals within the Municipal ROW impacted by the Initial Works in accordance with the guidelines listed in minimum maintenance standards of the Municipality with jurisdiction over that traffic signal; and
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(vi) Project Co shall replace any traffic signal infrastructure that gets damaged as a result of the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(vii) Project Co shall maintain or relocate all existing Municipal traffic cameras to comply with Municipal requirements. If existing Municipal traffic cameras are relocated to their permanent location or modified, Project Co shall include them as New Municipal Infrastructure
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(viii) Project Co shall provide new materials for all permanent traffic signal equipment within the Municipal ROW which is impacted by the Initial Works excluding existing traffic cameras.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(ix) Where existing traffic signal equipment is removed:
Requirement
[AH April _23] Context for next points, N/A for BOD.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(ix) A. such existing traffic signal cabinets and related equipment, including controllers and detectors, shall be returned to their respective owner, as applicable, upon energization of the permanent traffic signals; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (d)
(ix) B. such existing traffic signal pole bases and signal heads shall be disposed of by Project Co.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (e)
(i) Project Co shall provide pedestrian signals to comply with Municipal requirements.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (e)
(ii) Project Co shall provide all pedestrian signals in compliance with the accessibility requirements of the Municipalities and the AODA guidelines.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (f)
(i) Project Co shall provide bicycle signal heads and cross rides at signalized intersections where cycling facilities cross the street.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (f)
(ii) Project Co shall provide bicycle signal heads at each location noted above, such that cyclists travelling in both directions are accommodated.
Requirement
Traffic Section indicates analysis will include signal heads, but the hardware will be under electrical scope.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (f)
(iii) Project Co shall provide all controller cabinets with the capacity for adding bicycle detection. Bicycle signal heads and required equipment to accommodate bicycle signals, in addition to all other signalling requirements at that intersection
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(iv)            comply with the requirements of this Schedule C-6 –  and the applicable Reference Documents.
Requirement

[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v)             include, using scale drawings as necessary:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) A.                 the location and size of the Work Zone;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) B.                 duration and closure times of any Lane Closures, or other lane adjustments;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) C.                 traffic volume capacity during any Lane Closure;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) D.                 affected transit routes, including transit staging (all detour plans and service adjustments shall be specified by Transit Providers);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) E.                  affected bus stops and temporary bus stops;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) F.                  vehicular travel lanes, bicycle lanes, MUPs and sidewalks affected;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) G.                 access to commercial and residential properties and parking facilities affected;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) H.                 resultant lane configuration, including widths;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) I.                    length of left turn lanes, based on traffic flows;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) J.                   speed limit restrictions;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) K.                 location of any restricted width lanes;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) L.                  placement of all traffic control devices, traffic control persons, temporary signage, pavement markings, barriers, and protective works, as required;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) M.                placement and messages on all portable variable messaging signs;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) N.                 location of hazardous areas created by road geometry or local geography;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) O.                 any detour routes, lane shifts or diversions, including a justification of why such detour routes or diversions are proposed, using data from the Transportation Impact Study;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) P.                  the design speed and the design road vehicle for each detour route, lane shift, and diversion;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) Q.                 any traffic signal changes required, including traffic signal timings and phasing information;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) R.                 any impact to on-street parking;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) S.                  any impact to street lighting;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) T.                  areas of excavation near areas of traffic and their proposed safety measures;
Requirement
Section 10 Traffic
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
PF- April 4, Not addressed in Civil  BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) U.                 any other information that is necessary to assist in describing the planned traffic accommodation measures; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (c)
(v) V.                 a named Project Co person responsible to assist Emergency Services Providers personnel responding to an incident within the Work Zone.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] operational requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (d)
(d) Project Co shall accept full responsibility for quality control and quality assurance of all activities affecting the IWTM. The IWTM quality control process shall be conducted in accordance with the Traffic Quality Management Plan specified in Schedule A-18 – Quality Management. Project Co shall ensure that all personnel identified in the IWTM are suitably qualified and licensed.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (e)
(e)           Project Co shall ensure that all custom, detail drawings are signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer registered in Ontario. For clarity, OTM Book 7 typical layouts are not required to be signed or sealed by a Professional Engineer, when applied explicitly.
Requirement
Addressed in BOD under roadways section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (h)
(i)                 Project Co shall be responsible for coordinating with the Municipalities with regards to all modifications that may be required at Municipal traffic signals both during and after completion of design and construction. Project Co shall support proposed modifications with traffic engineering analysis and meet Municipal traffic signal requirements and standards.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (h)
(ii)               Project Co shall retain a contractor approved by the relevant Municipality to complete all traffic signal related elements of the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (h)
(iii)             Project Co shall provide a signalized intersection at every intersection for which the existing intersection is signalized.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (i)
(i)               Project Co shall ensure that the number of through traffic lanes on any roadway is not reduced to less than the permitted minimum lanes to remain open as set out in Table B.4-1 of Section B.4 of this Schedule C-6.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (i)
(ii)              Where a roadway is not identified on Table B.4-1 of Section B.4 of this Schedule C-6 – Initial Works, Project Co shall ensure that the permitted minimum number of lanes to remain open is the number of existing lanes.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (i)
(iii)              In order to be considered open for the purposes of Table B.4-1, Project Co shall ensure that lane minimum widths comply with Municipal Standards or the Ontario Traffic Manual where Municipal Standards are absent.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (i)
(iv)             For roads with a bus route, as noted in Table B.4-1, where a roadway is reduced to one lane in one direction, Project Co shall provide a bus bay or dedicated right turn lane for that direction.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (i)
(v)              Project Co shall not, during Weekday Peak Hours, reduce the respective existing traffic volume capacity of any two adjacent signalized intersections by greater than 50% at the same time. This is based on a comparison of the existing number of lanes open to traffic.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (i)
(vi)              Project Co shall not be permitted to have consecutive cyclist and pedestrian crossing closures at any time during construction. For clarity this requirement is to ensure the cyclist always has a way to exit/enter the intersection and cross as needed through the appropriate infrastructure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART A - General Requirements
A.8.3 (i)
(vii)             Project Co shall monitor and maintain all traffic accommodation in accordance with the accepted IWTM using certified traffic control personnel.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operations requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (g)
(i) Project Co shall maintain at all times the emergency vehicle pre-emption (EVP) system and its connection to the PSN installed and operated by the Municipalities that are impacted by the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operations requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(i) Project Co shall contact the relevant Municipalities with advance notice in compliance with Municipal requirements for planned activations, deactivations, relocation and connection of the traffic control signal to arrange for a mutually acceptable date and time to have the Municipal representative available. This shall apply to the temporary and permanent traffic signal installations.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) Project Co’s traffic and transit management shall minimize:
Requirement
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) A. travel time variability for transit;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) B. additional transit user travel times;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) C. additional transfers;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) D. additional resources required (buses and kilometres travelled);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) E. disruption to local transit infrastructure (bus stops and shelters);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) F. redundancies;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) G. disruption to other road users; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (a)
(i) A.               Expansion of the Stouffville, Lakeshore East, Barrie and Kitchener Service Groups requires that the number of road to rail grade crossings be reduced to enhance safety and to support performance and operational objectives. Modification and/or expansion of existing structures is also required.
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: assumed complete during scoping (at DDS)
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iii) H. additional bus traffic through residential areas.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (m)
(iv) Project Co shall maintain public access to all existing bus stops at all times. Where this is not feasible temporary bus stop shall be provided as required by Transit Providers and Municipalities
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - added a Transit Management Plan section, reflected here
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (n)
(i) Project Co shall report all traffic collisions as soon as detected to Emergency Services Provider;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (n)
(ii) Project Co shall prepare a report for all traffic collisions and near miss incidents, and provide a copy of the completed collision or incident report to Emergency Services Provider, Contracting Authority and the relevant Municipality within 72 hours of the occurrence.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (n)
(iii) Coordinating with Emergency Services Provider, Project Co shall maintain access to all Emergency Services Providers facilities, such as police and fire stations, throughout the Construction Period.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH - added to Traffic Management Plan]
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (o)
(i) Project Co shall follow the conditions established in OTM Book 7, Table 6 – Deployment of Traffic Control Persons to determine the requirements for the presence of traffic control persons during construction
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH - covered under traffic control description in TCP text, I think]
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (o)
(ii) Project Co shall ensure that all traffic control personnel are qualified in accordance with OHSA/CCOHS and the regulations thereunder
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (o)
(iii) Paid duty officers shall be required to assist at intersections in accordance with the OTM.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (p)
(i) Project Co shall inspect traffic control devices at least daily.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (p)
(ii) Throughout the Construction Period, Project Co shall maintain accurate daily traffic accommodation inspection records including the following:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (p)
(ii) A. condition and placement, including changes, additions and removals, of all traffic control devices, signage and pavement markings;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] no - this is field monitoring - operational, not design.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (p)
(ii) B. compliance with the IWTMs;
Requirement
[AH May 5, 2023] N/A - operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (p)
(ii) C. all collisions and near miss incidents, including those involving Road Vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (p)
(ii) D. record the dates, times, and content of all messages on all portable variable message signs (PVMS); and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (p)
(ii) E. date and time of Lane Closures.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5_23] - operational, not design. N/A.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (p)
(iii) The Contracting Authority may, from time to time, request copies of the daily traffic accommodation inspection records. Upon request, Project Co shall submit these within two Business Days of receiving such a request.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (q)
(i) Project Co shall identify on the relevant IWTM any requirements to remove, install or modify any existing signage on Municipal roads due to the Construction Activities.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (q)
(ii) Project Co shall be responsible for installing and removing all temporary construction signage and Pavement markings required by each accepted IWTM, such that:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (q)
(ii) A. all required temporary signage and pavement markings are in place during the course of Construction Activities relevant to that IWTM; and
Requirement
Section 4.6.14 Traffic Management
[AH April 5, 2023] operations, not design
[Civil]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (q)
(ii) B. all temporary signage and pavement markings are immediately removed following conclusion of such Construction Activities relevant to that IWTM.
Requirement
Section 4.6.14 Traffic Management
[AH April 5, 2023] operations, not design
[Civil]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (q)
(iii) Project Co shall provide and maintain all temporary pavement markings required in accordance with Schedule C-6 Section B.4.1(m) and site specific requirements indicated in Sections B.4.2, B.4.3, B.4.4 and B.4.5.
Requirement
Section 4.6.14 Traffic Management
[AH April 5, 2023] operations, not design
[Civil]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (q)
(iv) Installation of permanent signage and pavement markings shall be provided by Project Co in accordance with Schedule C-6 Section B.4.1(m) and site specific requirements indicated in Sections B.4.2, B.4.3, B.4.4 and B.4.5.
Requirement
Section 4.6.14 Traffic Management
[AH April 5, 2023] operations, not design
[Civil]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (r)
(i) Project Co shall maintain the existing Posted Speed in accordance with OTM Book 7, unless specified in Project Co’s IWTM
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (r)
(ii) Project Co shall not change speed limits on any existing Municipal roads, and other affected local and provincial roadways outside of active Site
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (r)
(iii) Where PVMSs are used for information and alternate route guide signs, Project Co shall ensure all messages are current and applicable to the prevailing conditions
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i.                    Project Co shall provide all Initial Works for implementation of traffic signals impacted:
Requirement
[AH April 5] narrative, refer to subpoints below (this line N/A)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 1.                  all underground and above ground traffic signal infrastructure;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 2.                  Commissioning of the signals;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 3.                  connection and integration of all Municipal traffic controllers, IT cabinet and traffic signal devices to the Municipal traffic centre(s) via PSN in compliance with the Municipal IT Cabinets at Outdoor Traffic/Transit/IoT Locations Requirements. This includes fibre, conduits and ducts from the IT cabinet to the PSN fibre network nearest splice point for traffic signals IP communications;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 4.                  integration with any existing TSP system, if applicable;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 5.                  provide traffic controller including controller cabinet hardware and Software upgrades. Project Co shall ensure that controllers are suitable for intersection operation vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle operation;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 6.                  installation, calibration and connection of all detection;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 7.                  temporary changes to signal timing and phasing on existing controllers to adjust to changing traffic stages;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Electrical sections.
[AH April 5] covered in Traffic Impact Considerations
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 8.                  temporary traffic signal system hardware and Software maintenance. This includes adjustment to signal heads to maintain OTM visibility requirements; and
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. i. 9.                  all associated programming work, controller build and testing, field implementation, field acceptance and verification.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. ii.                  Project Co shall replace any traffic signal infrastructure that gets damaged as a result of the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. iii.                Project Co shall maintain or relocate all existing Municipal traffic cameras to comply with Municipal requirements. If existing Municipal traffic cameras are relocated or modified to their permanent location, Project Co shall include them as New Municipal Infrastructure.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. iv.                Project Co shall provide new materials for all permanent traffic signal equipment within the Municipal ROW which is impacted by the Initial Works excluding existing traffic cameras.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. v.                  Where existing traffic signal equipment is removed:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. v. 1.                  such existing traffic signal cabinets and related equipment, including controllers and detectors, shall be returned to their respective owner, as applicable, upon energization of the permanent traffic signals; and
Requirement
as above
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) A. v. 2.                  such existing traffic signal pole bases and signal heads shall be disposed of by Project Co.
Requirement
as above
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) B. i.                    Project Co shall provide pedestrian signals to comply with Municipal requirements.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] included in BOD 4.4
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) B. ii.                  Project Co shall provide all pedestrian signals in compliance with the accessibility requirements of the Municipalities and the AODA guidelines.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) C. i.                    Project Co shall provide bicycle signal heads and cross rides at signalized intersections where MUPs cross the street.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Electrical section.
[AH April 5] agree but operational analysis of same included in BOD for traffic 4.4.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) C. ii.                  Project Co shall provide two bicycle signal heads at each location noted above, such that cyclists travelling in both directions are accommodated.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) C. iii.                Project Co shall provide all controller cabinets with the capacity for adding bicycle detection. Bicycle signal heads and required equipment to accommodate bicycle signals, in addition to all other signalling requirements at that intersection
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) C. v.                  Project Co shall maintain at all times the emergency vehicle pre-emption (EVP) system and its connection to the PSN installed and operated by the Municipalities that are impacted by the Initial Works.
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (n)
(i) D. i.                    Project Co shall contact the relevant Municipalities with advance notice in compliance with Municipal requirements for planned activations, deactivations, relocation and connection of the traffic control signal to arrange for a mutually acceptable date and time to have the Municipal representative available. This shall apply to the temporary and permanent traffic signal installations.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (o)
(i) A.                 Continuous sidewalks shall be provided over the length of the designated limits of work on both sides of any affected roadway.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (o)
(i) B.                 Existing sidewalks may be retained where possible, and where not otherwise affected by the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (o)
(i) C.                 Sidewalks shall be provided in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS/OPSD.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (o)
(i) D.                 Where new sidewalk is provided, it shall be constructed across driveways and entrances.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Roads section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (o)
(i) E.                  Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be barrier- free, and not exceed a grade of 5%. cross slopes shall be between 2%. Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be designed to maintain drainage and eliminate water accumulation in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Roads section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (o)
(i) F.                  Sidewalks materials shall be in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Roads section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (p)
(i) A.                 Project Co shall relocate all existing Municipal street furniture including bike rings, benches, waste receptacles and other items in the Municipal ROW impacted by the Initial Works. The location of the relocated street furniture shall be coordinated with the Municipality.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(i)                 Project Co shall comply with the lane closure restrictions outlined below.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(ii)               Scarborough Junction:
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(ii) A.                 Midland Avenue and St Clair Road shall not have any simultaneous lane closures or restrictions.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(iii)              Progress:
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(iii) i.               Progress Avenue and Ellesmere Road shall not have any simultaneous lane closures or restrictions.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(iv)              Havendale:
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(iv) i.               Midland Avenue and Kennedy Road shall not have any simultaneous lane closures or restrictions.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(v)              Huntingwood:
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (q)
(v) i.               Midland Avenue and Kennedy Road shall not have any simultaneous lane closures or restrictions.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (r)
(i)                 Project Co shall maintain pedestrian access in accordance with the requirements of Schedule A-11 – Lands and Encumbrances.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH] Addressed in BOD traffic
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (r)
(ii)               Where access to existing sidewalks, MUP, or bicycle lanes are closed or restricted due to Construction Activities, Project Co shall install and maintain Barrier-Free, temporary all-weather alternate routes for pedestrians and cyclists. All alternative routes to be approved by the City of Toronto prior to implementation.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section. NOTE this refers only to City of Toronto however is relevant in all municipalities
[AH April 5] addressed in traffic BOD "to municipal requirements"
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (r)
(ii) A. All temporary walkways shall be continuous, unobstructed temporary pedestrian clearways and connections, with proper construction safety mitigation (i.e. hoarding, etc.), hard surfaced, and  AODA compliant
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH Apr5] addressed in BOD
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(i)                 Project Co shall plan and execute the Initial Works in a manner that assists Transit Providers to maintain existing transit headways. This includes maintaining TSP at existing locations if applicable.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Electrical sections (Electrical for TSP).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(ii)               Project Co shall provide a minimum of 80 Business Days’ notice to a Transit Provider prior to any Construction Activity impacting that Transit Provider’s routes or infrastructure, including Lane Closures affecting bus routes (as noted in Table B.4-1), and relocation of bus stops
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Scheduling… relevant to traffic but not design.
[AH April 5] IWTP has a 20 day advance submission timeline - listed that, but noted the 80 days as well in the description.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii)             Project Co’s traffic and transit management shall minimize:
Requirement

[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii) A.                 travel time variability for transit;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii) B.                 additional transit user travel times;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii) C.                 additional transfers;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii) D.                 additional resources required (buses and kilometres travelled);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii) E.                  disruption to local transit infrastructure (bus stops and shelters);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii) F.                  redundancies;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii) G.                 disruption to other road users; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD (impacts from traffic)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iii) H.                 additional bus traffic through residential areas.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD TCP consideration)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (s)
(iv)               Project Co shall maintain public access to all existing at all times as per Transit Provider standards.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - Reflected in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (t)
(i) Project Co shall coordinate and comply with any Planned Closure Events by applicable authorities which may affect the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[AH April 5] Reflected in traffic management plan - scheduling is usually an element of TTMP.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (a)
(i) A. Expansion of the Lakeshore East Service Group requires that the number of road to rail grade crossings along the Kingston Subdivision be reduced to enhance safety and to support performance and operational objectives. The Kingston Subdivision portion of the Lakeshore East Service Group generally runs in an east/west direction from Oshawa to Union Station.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] N/A
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (a)
(iii) A. iii. Project Co. shall maintain a minimum of one (1) traffic lane in each direction on Thickson Road during construction to accommodate vehicle and cyclist traffic.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] reflected in BOD.

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (c)
(v) A. Project Co shall carry out the Initial Works described in Section B.4.3 in compliance with the applicable Engineering Reference Documents listed in Schedule C-6 Section A General, and Section B.4.1(c) and throughout this Section B.4.3(c).
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Electrical sections.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (c)
(vii) A. Project Co shall conform to the requirements specified in Section B.4.1 (c) (v).
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] nebulous reference
[AH April 5] this is the traffic signals requirements - relevant clauses reflected in BOD traffic, noted for electrical scope, see comments on B.4.1 (c) clauses. Addressed in BOD.
"(v) B. iv. Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) and Railway Association of Canada (RAC) Proximity Initiative, Guidelines for New Development in Proximity to Railway Operations."
Need to review this to see where it belongs.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) Project Co shall provide :
Requirement
N/A
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) A. all Traffic Signals related Initial Works in accordance with Section B.4.1 (d);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to all BOD documents under both  Traffic and Electrical sections.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD through response to B.4.1.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) B. all underground and above ground traffic signal infrastructure;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to all BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) D. connection and integration of all Municipal traffic controllers, IT cabinet and traffic signal devices to the Municipal traffic centre(s) via PSN in compliance with the Municipal IT Cabinets at Outdoor Traffic/Transit/IoT Locations Requirements. This includes fibre, conduits and ducts from the IT cabinet to the PSN fibre network nearest splice point for traffic signals IP communications;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to all BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) E. integration with any existing TSP system, if applicable;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to all BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) F. provide traffic controller including controller cabinet hardware and Software upgrades. Project Co shall ensure that controllers are suitable for intersection operation vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle operation;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) G. installation, calibration and connection of all detection;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) H. temporary changes to signal timing and phasing on existing controllers to adjust to changing traffic stages;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under both  Traffic and Electrical sections.
[AH April 5] already addressed through general requirement.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) I. temporary traffic signal system hardware and Software maintenance. This includes adjustment to signal heads to maintain OTM visibility requirements; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under both  Traffic and Electrical sections.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(i) J. all associated programming work, controller build and testing, field implementation, field acceptance and verification.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(ii) Project Co shall replace any traffic signal infrastructure that gets damaged as a result of the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(iii) Project Co shall maintain or relocate all existing Municipal traffic cameras to comply with Municipal requirements. If existing Municipal traffic cameras are relocated or modified to their permanent location, Project Co shall include them as New Municipal Infrastructure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - hardware should be under electrical scope.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(v) Project Co shall, where existing traffic signal equipment is removed:
Requirement
[AH Apr 5_23] see following, this line N/A for compliance.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(v) A. such existing traffic signal cabinets and related equipment, including controllers and detectors, shall be returned to their respective owner, as applicable, upon energization of the permanent traffic signals; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (d)
(v) B. such existing traffic signal pole bases and signal heads shall be disposed of by Project Co.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (e)
(i) Sidewalks
Requirement
N/A – narrative, refer to following sections.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (e)
(i)  A. Continuous sidewalks shall be provided over the length of the designated limits of work on both sides of any affected roadway.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (e)
(i)  B. Existing sidewalks may be retained where possible, and where not otherwise affected by the Initial Works.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (e)
(i)  C. Sidewalks shall be provided in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS/OPSD.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (e)
(i)  D. Where new sidewalk is provided, it shall be constructed across driveways and entrances.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (n)
(ii) Project Co shall not change speed limits on any existing Municipal roads, and other affected local and provincial roadways outside of active Site.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (p)
(ii) Project Co shall reuse the existing traffic cameras in the corridor. Project Co will not be required to install additional cameras.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (d)
(i) Project Co shall provide:
Requirement

[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (d)
(i) A. all Traffic Signals related Initial Works in accordance with Section B.4.1 (d);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Electrical sections.
[AH April 5] covered in BOD through response to 4.1 clause.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (d)
(iii) Project Co shall maintain or relocate all existing Municipal traffic cameras to comply with Municipal requirements. If existing Municipal traffic cameras are relocated or modified to their permanent location, Project Co shall include them as New Municipal Infrastructure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] hardware is under electrical scope.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (d)
(v) Project Co shall, where existing traffic signal equipment is removed:
Requirement

[AH April 5] Refer to following
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (d)
(v) A. such existing traffic signal cabinets and related equipment, including controllers and detectors, shall be returned to their respective owner, as applicable, upon energization of the permanent traffic signals; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (d)
(v) B. such existing traffic signal pole bases and signal heads shall be disposed of by Project Co.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (g)
(i) Major McKenzie Drive and Keele Street shall not have simultaneous lane closures or restrictions for the Initial Works related to the McNaughton Road grade separations
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] Addressed in BOD
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (g)
(ii) Timothy Street and Water Street shall not have simultaneous lane closures or restrictions for the Initial Works related to the Holland River rail bridge structure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(ii) Project Co shall provide a minimum of 80 Business Days’ notice to a Transit Provider prior to any Construction Activity impacting that Transit Provider’s routes or infrastructure, including Lane Closures affecting bus routes (as noted in Table B.4-1), and relocation of bus stops
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a scheduling not design
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) Project Co’s traffic and transit management shall minimize:
Requirement
N/A Narrative, refer to following sections.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) A. travel time variability for transit;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) B. additional transit user travel times;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) C. additional transfers;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) D. additional resources required (buses and kilometres travelled);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) E. disruption to local transit infrastructure (bus stops and shelters);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) F. redundancies;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] not sure what Redundancies are but based on surrounding context, seems likely applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) G. disruption to other road users; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iii) H. additional bus traffic through residential areas.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (i)
(iv) Project Co shall maintain public access to all existing bus stops at all times. Where this is not feasible temporary bus stop shall be provided as required by Transit Providers and Municipalities
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (j)
(ii) Project Co shall prepare a report for all traffic collisions and near miss incidents, and provide a copy of the completed collision or incident report to Emergency Services Provider, Contracting Authority and the relevant Municipality within 72 hours of the
occurrence.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (j)
(iii) Coordinating with Emergency Services Provider, Project Co shall maintain access to all Emergency Services Providers facilities, such as police and fire stations, throughout the Construction Period
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from same comment in B.4.1).
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (k)
(ii) Project Co shall ensure that all traffic control personnel are qualified in accordance with OHSA/CCOHS and the regulations thereunder
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (k)
(iii) Paid duty officers shall be required to assist at intersections in accordance with the OTM
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (l)
(ii) Throughout the Construction Period, Project Co shall maintain accurate daily traffic accommodation inspection records including the following:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (l)
(ii) A. condition and placement, including changes, additions and removals, of all traffic control devices, signage and Pavement markings;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] Addressed in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (l)
(ii) B. compliance with the IWTM;
Requirement
[AH April 5] the IWTM is what traffic is preparing - addressed in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (l)
(ii) C. all collisions and near miss incidents, including those involving Road Vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (l)
(ii) D. record the dates, times, and content of all messages on all portable variable message signs (PVMS); and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] Operations, not design.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (l)
(ii) E. date and time of Lane Closures.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] Operations, not design.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (l)
(iii) The Contracting Authority may, from time to time, request copies of the daily traffic accommodation inspection records. Upon request, Project Co shall submit these in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (m)
(ii) Project Co shall be responsible for installing and removing all temporary construction signage and Pavement markings required by each accepted IWTM, such that:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (m)
(ii) A. all required temporary signage and pavement markings are in place during the course of Construction Activities relevant to that IWTM; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April5] Operations, not design.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (m)
(ii) B. all temporary signage and pavement markings are immediately removed following conclusion of such Construction Activities relevant to that IWTM.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April5] Operations, not design.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (m)
(iii) Project Co shall provide and maintain all temporary pavement markings required in accordance with Schedule C-6 Section B.4.1(m) and site specific requirements indicated in Sections B.4.2, B.4.3, B.4.4 and B.4.5.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April5] Operations, not design.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (m)
(iv) Installation of permanent signage and pavement markings shall be provided by Project Co in accordance with Schedule C-6 Section B.4.1(m) and site specific requirements indicated in Sections B.4.2, B.4.3, B.4.4 and B.4.5.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic and Roads sections.
[AH April5] Operations, not design.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (n)
(ii) Project Co shall not change speed limits on any existing Municipal roads, and other affected local and provincial roadways outside of active Site.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] Covered in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (n)
(iii) Where PVMSs are used for information and alternate route guide signs, Project Co shall ensure all messages are current and applicable to the prevailing conditions.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (o)
(ii) Project Co shall maintain street lighting, whether existing or new, in operational order in accordance with the Municipal Standards, throughout the duration of construction within all Municipalities, until Handover to the relevant Municipality. Lighting levels during construction shall be, at a minimum, the same as those prior to construction
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (o)
(iii) Project Co shall provide temporary illumination in accordance with the applicable standards for the roads to accommodate traffic detours and diversions in accordance with applicable Municipal Standards, MTO OPSS 601 (formerly OPSS 106) – General Specification for Electrical Work and MTO Electrical Engineering Manual
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (o)
(iv) Project Co shall position temporary illumination for nighttime work such that they do not distract or create a visual impairment for oncoming traffic or cause light to spill into adjacent residences and other adjacent properties.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH Apr 5] Illumination should be electrical section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (p)
(ii) Project Co shall reuse the existing traffic cameras in the corridor. Project Co will not be required to install additional cameras.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (g)
(i) Kipling Avenue and Weston Road shall not have simultaneous lane closures or restrictions for the Initial Works related to the Islington Avenue bridge structure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(i) Project Co shall plan and execute the Initial Works in a manner that assists Transit Providers to maintain existing transit headways. This includes maintaining TSP at existing locations if applicable.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] Addressed in BOD traffic (response to 4.1)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(ii) Project Co shall provide a minimum of 80 Business Days’ notice to a Transit Provider prior to any Construction Activity impacting that Transit Provider’s routes or infrastructure, including Lane Closures affecting bus routes (as noted in Table B.4-1), and relocation of bus stops
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a scheduling not design
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) Project Co’s traffic and transit management shall minimize:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] no context here. See following items
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) A. travel time variability for transit;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) B. additional transit user travel times;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) C. additional transfers;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) D. additional resources required (buses and kilometres travelled);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) E. disruption to local transit infrastructure (bus stops and shelters);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) F. redundancies;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] not sure what Redundancies are but based on surrounding context, seems likely applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) G. disruption to other road users; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iii) H. additional bus traffic through residential areas.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (i)
(iv) Project Co shall maintain public access to all existing bus stops at all times. Where this is not feasible temporary bus stop shall be provided as required by Transit Providers and Municipalities
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD (duplication from previous comment)
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (j)
(ii) Project Co shall prepare a report for all traffic collisions and near miss incidents, and provide a copy of the completed collision or incident report to Emergency Services Provider, Contracting Authority and the relevant Municipality within 72 hours of the occurrence.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (j)
(iii) Coordinating with Emergency Services Provider, Project Co shall maintain access to all Emergency Services Providers facilities, such as police and fire stations, throughout the Construction Period
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (k)
(ii) Project Co shall ensure that all traffic control personnel are qualified in accordance with OHSA/CCOHS and the regulations thereunder
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (k)
(iii) Paid duty officers shall be required to assist at intersections in accordance with the OTM
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (l)
(ii) Throughout the Construction Period, Project Co shall maintain accurate daily traffic accommodation inspection records including the following:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (l)
(ii) A. condition and placement, including changes, additions and removals, of all traffic control devices, signage and Pavement markings;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - N/A operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (l)
(ii) B. compliance with the IWTM;
Requirement
[AH April 5] - N/A operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (l)
(ii) C. all collisions and near miss incidents, including those involving Road Vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists;
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (l)
(ii) D. record the dates, times, and content of all messages on all portable variable message signs (PVMS); and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (l)
(ii) E. date and time of Lane Closures.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - N/A operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (l)
(iii) The Contracting Authority may, from time to time, request copies of the daily traffic accommodation inspection records. Upon request, Project Co shall submit these in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a contract requirement, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (m)
(ii) Project Co shall be responsible for installing and removing all temporary construction signage and Pavement markings required by each accepted IWTM, such that:
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (m)
(ii) A. all required temporary signage and pavement markings are in place during the course of Construction Activities relevant to that IWTM; and
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - N/A operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (m)
(ii) B. all temporary signage and pavement markings are immediately removed following conclusion of such Construction Activities relevant to that IWTM.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - N/A operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (m)
(iii) Project Co shall provide and maintain all temporary pavement markings required in accordance with Schedule C-6 Section B.4.1(m) and site specific requirements indicated in Sections B.4.2, B.4.3, B.4.4 and B.4.5.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - N/A operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (n)
(i) Project Co shall maintain the existing Posted Speed in accordance with OTM Book 7, unless specified in Project Co’s IWTM,
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] addressed in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (n)
(ii) Project Co shall not change speed limits on any existing Municipal roads, and other affected local and provincial roadways outside of active Site.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] Addressed in BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (n)
(iii) Where PVMSs are used for information and alternate route guide signs, Project Co shall ensure all messages are current and applicable to the prevailing conditions
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design consideration
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.5 (s)
(ii) Project Co shall coordinate the exact location and placement of the fencing used to delineate the construction area with Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] n/a operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iii) traffic signal drawings, demonstrating conformance with the requirements of this Schedule C-6, including:
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iii) A. approximate locations of all traffic, pedestrian and bike signals, and cabinets; and
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(iii) B. typical details of all traffic signal equipment;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(ix) the preliminary traffic and transit management plan and traffic control plan; and
Requirement
[AH April 5] - N/A operational, not design
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (b)
(ii) C. final update to traffic signals design submitted as part of the Design Development Submittals;
Requirement
Refer to BOD Section 12.1 – electrical scope by others
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (b)
(iii) final Initial Works Traffic Management Plan, Transit Management Plan and Traffic Control Plan specific to grade separations (the “Traffic Management Plan – Transit Management Plan and Traffic Control Plan – Grade Separation”);
Requirement
[MOA Mar 31_23] Applicable to Civil Corridors BOD documents under Traffic section.
[AH April 5] - N/A operational, not design -this is field coordination with the work traffic is preparing
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) C. i. 1.                  OPSS 510 - Removal;
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
[Civil]: This is addressed generally in BOD
PF-April 4, Removals not addressed in Civil, Clearing and Grubbing is addressed.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) C. i. 2.                  OPSS 1103 – Emulsified Asphalt; and
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
[Civil]: This is addressed generally in BOD
PF-April 4, in civil BOD Asphalt refers to OPSS 1150 not OPSS 1103
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iv) A.                 Project Co shall comply with the grading requirements of the relevant Municipal Standards or, in absence of such standards, applicable MTO OPSS/OPSD shall be used.
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations under section 5. Civil Infrastructure
4.6 Design Criteria
4.6.5 Grading
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
[Civil]: This is addressed generally in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iv) B.                 Project Co shall ensure that grading conforms to the requirements of Municipal Standards or OPSS.MUNI.206 for Initial Works within Municipal ROW.
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations 
4.Civil Infrastructure
4.6 Design Criteria
4.6.5 Grading
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
[Civil]: This is addressed generally in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iv) C.                 Project Co shall ensure that compaction conforms to the requirements of Municipal Standards or OPSS.MUNI.501 for Initial Works within Municipal ROW.
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
[Civil]: This is addressed generally in BOD
PF-April 4, in civil BOD there is no specific article about compaction
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(ii) D. Project Co shall perform site investigations to determine soil parameters, water tables, location of underground services and above grade obstructions;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs
PF- April 4, Not addressed in Civil  BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(ii) E. Project Co shall use the parameters in Section B.4.6(a)(ii)D to determine the depths, sizes and locations of the Noise Barrier post footings;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs
[Roads]: N/A
PF- April 4, Not addressed in Civil  BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(ii) F. Project Co shall establish the alignment and, the top and bottom elevations of the Noise Barriers and shall use these elevations to develop the layout and fabrication drawings indicating top and bottom of noise barrier elevations:
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs
[Roads]: N/A
PF- April 4, Not addressed in Civil  BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(ii) G. Project Co shall perform all site preparation, rough and final grading, Noise Barrier marking and staking showing station number, bottom of Noise Barrier elevation, cut or fill dimension and offset to the centerline of the Noise Barrier wall at approximately 25m intervals and below grade services shall also be clearly marked on site by Project Co;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs
[Roads]: N/A
PF- April 4, this is mix of Civil and Structure
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(ii) C. grading;
Requirement
Section 4.7 Inputs and Outputs
[Roads]: N/A
PF- April 4, Not addressed in Civil  BOD - Grade Separation related
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.1    Each Works Submittal package for New City of Toronto Infrastructure shall include all elements of the New City of Toronto Infrastructure for the applicable geographical area, including roadways, grading, drainage, New Municipal Utility Infrastructure, structures, traffic signals, landscaping and streetlighting, as applicable.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.2    Project Co shall provide one hard copy in large format (A0 or A1 size) and one hard copy in reduced format (11” x 17”, fold-outs, folded to 8.5” x 11”) of all Works Submittals that are drawings for New City of Toronto Infrastructure.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.3    Project Co shall include the following, as applicable, for all Design Development Submittals and final Construction Document Submittals for the New City of Toronto Infrastructure:
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.3 (h)    pavement marking and traffic signage drawings shall be provided, as follows:
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.3 (h) (i)    pavement marking and traffic signage information shown in black;
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.3 (h) (ii)    all other information to be shown in light gray, including all engineering and landscape components proposed, existing and proposed Utilities, existing trees to be preserved, protected or removed and proposed trees, and other assets including traffic signage, hydro, streetlight, pedestrian light poles, furnishings (benches, bike racks and waste receptacles), and existing and proposed grading information, curb, cycling infrastructure, sidewalks, decorative paving, planters, tree planting and other landscaping and parking infrastructure, where applicable; and
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: To be addressed at design submission
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.3 (h) (iii)    drawings shall be provided at a scale of 1:500 in hard copy and electronic PDF; and
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: To be addressed at design submission
Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure
17.1.2
2.3 (i)    roadway plan and profile drawings, including cross sections, shall be provided with drawings at a scale of 1:500 in hard copy and electronic PDF.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: To be addressed at design submission
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (a)
(i) B.               This Section B.4.1 lists the general requirements for the Fixed Infrastructure Works that are part of all Service Groups defined in this Section B.4.
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: to be addressed under specific items.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (a)
(i) C.               Additional specific requirements are indicated under Sections B.4.2 for the Stouffville Service Group, Section B.4.3 for the Lakeshore East Service Group, Section B.4.4 for the Barrie Service Group and Section B.4.5 for the Kitchener Service Group.
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: to be addressed under specific items.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(i) A.                 Project Co shall carry out the Initial Works described in this Section B4 in compliance with the following applicable Reference Documents, including those listed in this Schedule C-6, Section A General Requirements:
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: to be addressed under specific items.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(i) A. i.                    Municipal Standards;
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(i) A. ii.                  Reference Documents issued by MTO; and
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(i) A. iii.                TAC Geometric Design Guide for Canadian Roads.
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) A. i.                    Project Co shall use the control vehicles and design vehicles as required by the Municipalities for the design of intersection layout geometry, applicable sight distances, and roadway horizontal and vertical clearance requirements.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) A. ii.                  Project Co shall design detours and access roads to accommodate vehicles requiring access to each property affected by the Initial Works.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) A. iii.                  The design vehicle for each intersection shall accommodate the applicable design vehicle and control vehicle according to:
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) A. iii.  1.                     location of truck routes and bus routes; and
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) A. iii.  2.                  type of Emergency Service Provider vehicle and Municipal maintenance vehicle.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) B. i.                    Project Co shall ensure that horizontal alignment and minimum radii of roadways within the Municipal ROW complies with Municipal Standards, the requirements of TAC Geometric Design Guide for Canadian Roads, and the requirements set out in Appendix F to this Schedule C-6.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) B. ii.                  Horizontal alignments of roadways not affected by the implementation of the Initial Works do not require modification.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) C. i.                    Project Co shall obtain the approval of the relevant Road Authority for any planned modifications to the vertical alignment of any roadway under the jurisdiction of that Road Authority.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) C. ii.                  For roadways within the New Municipal ROW, Project Co shall provide the standard gradients for roadways provided in Appendix F to this Schedule C-6.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) C. iii.                Vertical grades of roadways not affected by the implementation of the Initial Works do not require modification.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) D. i.                    Project Co shall provide intersection lane configurations to match existing conditions except for the intersection layouts described in Appendix F to this Schedule C-6.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) D. ii.                  Intersection layouts shall comply with the turning radius requirements of the applicable control vehicle and design vehicle, and applied for each traffic lane and turning movement, subject to the following:
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) D. ii. 1.                  where an at-grade bicycle lane is present, Project Co can consider it as available for the turning movement of Road Vehicles; and
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: To be addressed at design submission
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) D. ii. 2.                  Project Co shall provide left turn lane lengths to match existing conditions.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) D. iii.                Project Co shall provide intersection sight distances in compliance with the requirements noted in TAC Geometric Design Guidelines and as set out in Appendix F of this Schedule C-6.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) D. iv.                Project Co shall provide intersection layouts, curb radii and lane configuration in compliance with Appendix F of this Schedule C-6. Project Co shall minimize curb radii to minimize pedestrian crossing distances.
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: To be addressed at design submission
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) E. i.                    Project Co shall provide vehicular lane configurations and widths as set out in Appendix F of this Schedule C-6.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) E. ii.                  For roads not set out in Appendix F, Project Co shall retain and restore their pre-existing lane configurations and widths if such roads are affected by the Initial Works.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) E. iii.                Project Co may temporarily modify lane configurations and widths during construction as set out in Section A.8.
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: To be addressed at design submission
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) E. iv.            Project Co shall ensure at all times that adequate lateral clearances are provided from road detour barriers to the oncoming active vehicular lane to allow emergency vehicles to safely pass traffic in the case of an emergency.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. i.         As part of the Initial Works, Project Co shall reinstate all existing midblock driveways, entrances and laneways except the Relocation Entrances set out in Section B.4.1(b)(ii)F.ii, which shall be relocated in accordance with Project Co’s design and Municipal Standards prior to submitting the Consent to Operate System Assurance Submission and the Permanent Removal Entrances set out in Section B.4.1(b)(ii)F.iii, which shall be permanently removed.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. The “Relocation Entrances” shall be as follows:
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 1.      Progress Grade Separation at 11 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 2.      Passmore Grade Separation at 31 Passmore Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 3.      Progress Grade Separation at 45 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 4.      Progress Grade Separation at 111 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 5.      Progress Grade Separation at 55 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 6.      Progress Grade Separation at 60 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 7.      Progress Grade Separation at 85 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 8.      Progress Grade Separation at 65 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 9.      Progress Grade Separation at 80 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 10.      Progress Grade Separation at 77 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 11.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 63 Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 12.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 65 Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 13.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 67 Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 14.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 93A Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 15.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 93B Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 16.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 95 Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. ii. 17.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 95A Galloway Road.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii.     The “Permanent Removal Entrances” shall be as follows:
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 1.      Denison Grade Separation at 1490 Denison Street
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 2.      Denison Grade Separation at 1525 Denison Street
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 3.      Kennedy Grade Separation at 7220 Kennedy Rd.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 4.      McNicoll Grade Separation at 2155 McNicoll Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 5.      Progress Grade Separation at 1 William Kitchen Rd.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 6.      Progress Grade Separation at 34 Progress Ave.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 7.      Havendale Pedestrian Grade Separation at 58 Havendale.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 8.      Havendale Pedestrian Grade Separation at 56 Havendale.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 9.      Havendale Pedestrian Grade Separation at 72 Havendale..
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 10.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 85 Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 11.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 87 Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 12.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 89 Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 13.      Galloway Road Grade Separation at 91 Galloway Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 14.      McNaughton Road Grade Separation Maple GO Station parking lot egress.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) F. iii. 15.      Poplar Road Grade Separation at 79 Poplar Road
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) G. Project Co shall consult with the Municipalities and affected property owners to ensure that all reinstatement pursuant to Section B.4.1(b)(ii)F.i is in an agreed location and of an appropriate design width for the current and proposed use of the property. Any alteration beyond reinstatement of existing driveways shall be at the expense of the requesting Party and subject to agreement by Project Co.
Requirement
Addressed in Section 12 of BOD.
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(ii) H. Project shall ensure that public access to Municipal Lands specifically related to existing parks in accordance with Schedule A-11 – Lands and Encumbrances are provided at all times throughout the Initial Works period.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) A.                 Design and Performance Requirements
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) A. i.                    Project Co shall ensure that all the roadway pavement structures conform to the standards of the applicable Municipal and Road Authorities and are appropriate for the site-specific geotechnical conditions.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed by Geotechnical BOD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) A. ii.                  In case of absence of Municipal Standards, Project Co shall comply as a minimum with the OPSS requirements related to pavement.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) A. iii.                Project Co shall construct the pavement structure such that drainage complies with applicable Reference Documents.
Requirement
Section 10 Drainage & Stormwater Management (SWM)
Addressed generically and not specifically
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) A. iv.     Project Co shall ensure that all pedestrian, cyclist, vehicular, and transit facilities tie in to connecting facilities in accordance with relevant Municipal Standards and such facilities have smooth and safe transitions with existing Municipal Infrastructure.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) B. i.                    Project Co shall provide new pavement structures in compliance with Municipal Standards in all locations where the existing pavement structure is disturbed for the purpose of constructing the Initial Works.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) B. ii.                  Project Co shall be responsible for re-instating the pavement structure in compliance with Municipal Standards in all locations where the pavement structure has been altered for the purpose of constructing the Initial Works.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(iii) B. iii.                If any roads will be opened to public traffic and/or construction traffic prior to completion of the surface course paving, Project Co shall design the pavement such that the unfinished pavement can carry public traffic and/or construction traffic until the surface course is placed.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(vi) C. xii.              all windows installed shall be UL972 burglar resistance up to 4.0 metres above grade;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (b)
(viii) A.                     Project Co shall provide all temporary and permanent signing and pavement markings in compliance with the requirements of OTM, OPSS, and the applicable Engineering Reference Documents
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(i) Project Co shall ensure localized repairs to impacted roads including curb, gutters, medians, and any affected road element will be implemented as per City of Toronto Standards.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(ii) A. Continuous sidewalks shall be provided over the length of the designated limits of work on both sides of any affected roadway.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(ii) B. Existing sidewalks may be retained where possible, and where not otherwise affected by the Initial Works.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD
[Roads]: To be addressed at design submission
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(ii) C. Sidewalks shall be provided in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS/OPSD.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(ii) D. Where new sidewalk is provided, it shall be constructed across driveways and entrances.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(ii) E. Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be barrier- free.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(ii) F. Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be designed to maintain drainage and eliminate water accumulation in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS and or OPSD.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (i)
(ii) G. Sidewalks materials shall be in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS and or OPSD.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (j)
(i) A. Project Co shall relocate all existing Municipal street furniture including bike rings, benches, waste receptacles and other items in the Municipal ROW impacted by the Initial Works. The location of the relocated street furniture shall be coordinated with the Municipality.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (k)
(i) Project Co shall comply with the site specific lane closure restrictions outlined in Sections B.4.2 (q), B.4.3 (g), B.4.4 (g) and B.4.5 (g).
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (l)
(i) Project Co shall maintain pedestrian access in accordance with the requirements of Schedule A-11 – Lands and Encumbrances.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (l)
(ii) Where access to existing sidewalks, MUP, or bicycle lanes are closed or restricted due to Construction Activities, Project Co shall install and maintain Barrier-Free, temporary all-weather alternate routes for pedestrian and cyclists. All alternative routes to be approved by the relevant Municipality prior to implementation; and
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (l)
(iii) Alternative route lengths shall be minimized to avoid excessive detour distances.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (u)
(iii) For Construction Activities involving municipal roadways, Project Co shall comply with the following:
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (u)
(iii) A. Project Co shall ensure the following requirements are met by November 30th of each calendar year of the Initial Works:
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (u)
(iii) A. i. base asphalt is completed where started;
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (u)
(iii) A. ii. maintenance holes and catch basins are flush with base asphalt; and
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (u)
(iii) A. iii. all temporary line painting is complete.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.1 (w)
(ii) Project Co shall coordinate the exact location and placement of the fencing used to delineate the construction area with Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C- 2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (c)
(ii) The existing horizontal and vertical alignments of Danforth Road shall be maintained in the final configuration.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (d)
(iii) A barricade and warning sign are required at the limit of the dead-end road in accordance with OPS.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (d)
(v) The existing roads functional cross section shall be retained.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (e)
(ix) Project Co shall provide a 3 meter wide, unobstructed asphalt path to connect to Wolfe Avenue from the ramp and stair structure in accordance with City of Toronto standards.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (e)
(x) Project Co shall provide a minimum of 2.35 meter minimum turning radii at switchbacks.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (h)
(iii) Project Co shall provide a 2.1m wide sidewalk, to City of Toronto Standards, along the east side of William Kitchen Road from the NE corner of Progress Ave and William Kitchen Road to the north of the 1 William Kitchen existing vehicular entrance.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (h)
(iv) Project Co shall provide a ramp and drop curb at the parking lot to provide pedestrian access to the 1 William Kitchen Road property.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (i)
(ii) Project Co to transition McNicoll bike lanes to on-road 1.5m painted bike lanes on each side of the Silver Star south leg as per City of Toronto Standards; and
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (i)
(iii) Project Co shall terminate the on-road painted bike lanes at the existing Multi-Use Path at the South terminus of Silver Star Boulevard.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (k)
(k) Project Co shall provide a new Road under Rail Grade Separation at Kennedy Road at MP 52.40.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(i) A. Project Co shall provide all roadways in compliance with this Section B.4.2 (b) and the roadway design criteria provided in Appendix F of this Schedule C-6 – Output Specification.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(i) B. Project Co shall reinstate all Existing Infrastructure in the Municipal ROW altered for the purpose of the implementation of the Initial Works in compliance with this Schedule C-6, Section B.2 – Track Stormwater and Drainage.
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(i) C. For clarity, this includes any areas disturbed by Third Party Contractors that are not restored by the time of takeover of the Site by Project Co shall be reinstated by Project Co.
Requirement
N/A at DDD
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(i) D. Project Co shall provide the number of lanes specified in Appendix F for each roadway in its final configuration.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(ii) A. Project Co shall reconstruct The Danforth Road at Midland Avenue intersection to eliminate the channelization islands.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
Will be addressed at DDS phase
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(ii) A. i. Project Co shall provide TTC bus platforms Type “B” as per City of Toronto Standard T-310.010-8 at the northwest, northeast, and southeast corners of the intersection. In addition, the northwest bus shelter shall be reinstated, the northeast bus shelter shall be relocated 20 meters west, and the existing southeast bus shelter shall be maintained.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(iii) A. Project Co shall reconstruct the Danforth Road pavement, including intersection at Midland Avenue as composite pavement to comply with 25-year design life as per City of Toronto standards.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(iii) B. Project Co shall reconstruct the Midland Avenue pavement as flexible pavement as per City of Toronto standards.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(iv) F. i. 1. Project Co shall provide a permanent pumping, retention, treatment and discharge of the stormwater for areas that can not drain by gravity to an existing stormwater system;
Requirement
Not in BOD
Pump station requirements will be added in a later version of the BOD. Hesham to add.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(iv) F. i. 2. The system shall be capable of pumping stormwater up to the allowable release rate of the 100-year flows from the detention
tank;
Requirement
Not in BOD
Pump station requirements will be added in a later version of the BOD. Hesham to add.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (l)
(iv) F. i. 3. The detention tank shall temporarily store and release flows to ensure the post-development flows do not exceed the current minor system design standard or the overall capacity of the receiving storm sewer;
Requirement
Not in BOD
Pump station requirements will be added in a later version of the BOD. Hesham to add.
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (m)
(vi) A. Project Co shall provide adequate security measures, such as non-climbable construction hoarding and barriers, to deter people from crossing the rail corridor during the construction of the grade separation structures at Corvette Ave.
Requirement
N/A
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.2 (m)
(vi) B. The temporary closure of the pedestrian crossing at Corvette Ave shall not happen simultaneously to any closures of pedestrian crossings or sidewalks at Danforth Rd or Midland Ave.
Requirement
N/A
[Roads]: N/A

Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(i) A. Project Co shall provide roadways for implementation of the Grade Separations per Section B.4.1 (b) and this Section B.4.3 (b).
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. i. City of Toronto, Transportation Services Road Engineering Design Guidelines
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. ii. Toronto On-Street Bikeway Design Guide
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. iii. Pavement Design and Rehabilitation Guideline
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. v. City of Toronto Transportation Services Toronto Multi-use Trail Design Guidelines
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. vi. Toronto Complete Streets Guidelines - Street Design for Cycling
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. vii. City of Toronto Development Infrastructure Policy & Standards for Public Local Residential Streets And Private Streets
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. viii. City of Toronto Multi-Use Path Design Guidelines.
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. ix. TRCA Guidelines and Requirements, including but not limited to:
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. ix. 1. Geotechnical Engineering Design and Submission
Requirements, November 2007.
Requirement
N/A
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. ix. 5. Geotechnical Engineering Design and Submission Plan
Guidelines
Requirement
N/A
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. ix. 6. Crossing Guidelines
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed generally in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(ii) A. ix. 7. Post Construction Restoration Guidelines
Requirement
Section 5 Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed generally in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(iii) A. Project Co shall comply with the requirements described in Section B.4.1(b)(iii) and this Section B.4.3(b)(iii) and set out in Appendix F of this Schedule C-6 Section B.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(iii) B. i. Project Co shall provide vehicular turning circle configurations for the Poplar Road Underpass as set out in Appendix F of this Schedule C-6 Section B and as required by the Municipalities.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(iii) C. i. Project Co shall provide a MUP configuration for the Poplar Road Underpass as set out in Appendix F of this Schedule C-6 Section B.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(iv) A. Project Co shall comply with the requirements described in Section B.4.1 (b).
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (b)
(v) A. Project Co shall comply with the requirements described in Section B.4.1 (b) (iv).
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (e)
(i)  E. Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be barrier- free, and not exceed a grade of 5%. Cross slopes shall be between 2% and 4%. Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be designed to maintain drainage and eliminate water accumulation in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards.
Requirement
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (e)
(i)  F. Sidewalks materials shall be in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards.
Requirement
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.3 (f)
(i) A. Project Co shall relocate all existing Municipal street furniture including bike rings, benches, waste receptacles and other items in the Municipal ROW impacted by the Initial Works. The location of the relocated street furniture shall be coordinated with the Municipality.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (a)
(ii) A. v. Project Co. shall maintain a detour road throughout construction with a single lane of traffic in each direction on McNaughton Road.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (b)
(i) A. Project Co shall provide roadways for implementation of the Grade Separations per Section B.4.1 (b) and this Section B.4.4 (b).
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (b)
(ii) A. Project Co shall carry out the Initial Works described in Section B.4.4 (b) in compliance with the following applicable Engineering Reference Documents, including those listed in Schedule C-6 Section A General, Section B.4.1 (c) (ii) and throughout this Section B.4.3 (b):
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (b)
(ii) A. i. City of Vaughan Engineering Design Criteria & Standard Drawings
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (b)
(ii) A. ii. Town of Aurora Design Criteria Manual for Engineering Plans
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (b)
(iii) A. Project Co shall comply with the requirements described in Section B.4.1 (b) (iii) and this Section B.4.4 (b) (iii) and set out in Appendix F of this Schedule C-6 Section B.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (b)
(iv) A. Project Co shall comply with the requirements described in Section B.4.1 (b) (iii).
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (b)
(v) A. Project Co shall comply with the requirements described in Section B.4.1 (b) (iv).
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(ii) A. ii. Wellington Street Grade Separation structures, in the Town of Aurora, including all retaining and supporting structures.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(ii) A. 1. Clubinis Creek Bridge structures, in the Town of
Newmarket, including all retaining and supporting structures.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(ii) A. 2. Holland River Bridge structures, in the Town of Newmarket, including all retaining and supporting structures.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(iii) A. Where existing Civil Structures are to be used, Project Co shall conform to the requirements specified in Section B.4.1 (c) (iii) B.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(iii) B. The following Civil Structures exist along the Newmarket Subdivision, which the Initial Works may require to be used, removed, replaced, modified or rehabilitated:
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(iii) B. i. Clubinis Creek rail bridge structure;
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(iii) B. ii. Holland River rail bridge structure;
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A to this BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (c)
(iii) B. iii. Any other existing Civil Structures, as required by the Initial Works.
Requirement
N/A – will be addressed in BOD detailing grade separation
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (e)
(i) Sidewalks
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (e)
(i) A. Continuous sidewalks shall be provided over the length of the designated limits of work on both sides of any affected roadway.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (e)
(i) B. Existing sidewalks may be retained where possible, and where not otherwise affected by the Initial Works.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (e)
(i) C. Sidewalks shall be provided in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards and OPSS/OPSD.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (e)
(i) D. Where new sidewalk is provided, it shall be constructed across driveways and entrances.
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (e)
(i) E. Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be barrier- free, and not exceed a grade of 5%. cross slopes shall be between 2% and 4%. Sidewalks and secondary pathways shall be designed to maintain drainage and eliminate water accumulation in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards.
Requirement
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
PF- April 4 changed color to yellow -Road Requirements
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (e)
(i) F. Sidewalks materials shall be in compliance with applicable Municipal Standards.
Requirement
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (q)
(i)  Project Co shall coordinate with the Municipalities to define the boundaries for maintenance responsibilities during Construction Period within the Municipal ROW
Requirement
Section 12.5 Design Standards
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (q)
(ii) Project Co shall carry out Construction Period maintenance in accordance with Municipal Standards and any requirements of all approvals which Project Co is required to obtain
Requirement
Section 12.3 Design Aspect Construction Stage
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (q)
(iii) For Construction Activities involving municipal roadways, Project Co shall comply with the following:
Requirement
Section 12.3 Design Aspect Construction Stage
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (q)
(iii) A. Project Co shall ensure the following requirements are met by November 30th of each calendar year of the Initial Works:
Requirement
Section 12.3 Design Aspect Construction Stage
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (q)
(iii) A. i. base asphalt is completed where started;
Requirement
Section 12.3 Design Aspect Construction Stage
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (q)
(iii) A. ii. maintenance holes and catch basins are flush with base asphalt; and
Requirement
Section 12.3 Design Aspect Construction Stage
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (q)
(iii) A. iii. all temporary line painting is complete.
Requirement
Section 12.3 Design Aspect Construction Stage
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (s)
(ii) Project Co shall coordinate the exact location and placement of the fencing used to delineate the construction area with Contracting Authority in accordance with Schedule C-2 – Initial Works Review Procedure.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(ii) I. Project Co shall ensure 20% of the total area of the Noise Barrier shall be transparent infill panels based on the site-specific requirements;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (s)
(iii) Project Co shall secure all scaffolding, formwork and other protective coverings used on the Project in such a manner that they will not come loose by the movement of passing trains.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (s)
(iv) Project Co shall ensure that equipment is not positioned to block the railway access road, track area or any part of the Rail Corridor unless Project Co obtains the prior written consent for the works from Contracting Authority that permits otherwise.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.4 (s)
(v) Project Co shall use commercially available generators contained within noise insulated enclosures to minimize noise from such equipment. Noise levels shall always be kept at or below City’s Noise By-Law requirements, without applicable permits and approvals.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(i) Project Co shall design and construct noise mitigation measures in the form of Noise Barriers that achieve a minimum of a 5 dB sound level reduction (insertion loss of 5 dBA). The Noise Barriers shall be a minimum of 5 meters in height. Where a 5 meter Noise Barrier does not achieve the required sound level reduction the Noise Barrier can be up to 7 meters in height.
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(ii) B. the visual aesthetic appearance of the Noise Barrier panels, in terms of colour, pattern and texture, shall be uniform when viewed at a distance of 15m from the face of the barrier and any visual blemishes shall be repaired and touched-up in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations;
Requirement
N/A at DDD phase
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(ii) C. noise barriers shall be a post and panel system;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (a)
(ii) H. Project Co shall provide positive drainage to eliminate ponding at the base of the Noise Barriers;
Requirement
Section 10 Drainage and Stormwater Management (SWM)
Addressed generically and not specifically
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) A. Canadian Standards Association:
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) A. i. CAN/CSA S6 Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code (CHBDC); and
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) A. ii. CSA Z107.9 Standard for Certification of Noise Barriers;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM):
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. i. ASTM C423 Standard Test Method for Sound Absorption and Sound Absorption Coefficient by the Reverberation Room Method;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. ii. ASTM C666 Standard Test Method for Resistance of Concrete to Rapid Freezing and Thawing;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. iii. ASTM C672 Standard Test Method for Scaling Resistance of Concrete Surfaces Exposed to De-icing Chemicals;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. iv. ASTM E84 Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. v. ASTM E90 Standard Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. vi. ASTM E795 Standard Practices for Mounting Test Specimens During Sound Absorption Tests;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(vii) Project Co shall ensure any stains, paints, and anti-graffiti coatings be applied at the Noise Barrier manufacturing plant.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. vii. ASTM G155 Standard Practice for Operating Xenon Arc Light Apparatus for Exposure of Non-Metallic Materials; and
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (b)
(i) B. viii. National Precast Concrete Association NPCA Plant Certification Quality Control for Precast Concrete Plants;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(i) Project Co shall provide Noise Barriers that are designed to withstand a wind pressure of a 25-year return period determined on a site-specific basis or a wind pressure of 460 Pa, which ever is greater, in accordance with the CHBDC;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(viii) Project Co shall ensure the Flame Spread Index (FSI) of the Noise Barrier panels shall be less than 10 as determined in accordance with ASTM E84 requirements;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(ix) Project Co shall ensure the smoke development (SD) of the Noise Barrier panels shall be less than 12 as determined in accordance with ASTM E84 requirements. 4.2.6 Weather Exposure;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(ii) Project Co shall ensure the Sound Transmission Loss (STL) is greater than 20 decibels at all frequencies as determined in accordance with ASTM E90 requirements. The Sound Transmission Class (STC) of the Noise Barrier panels shall be equal to or greater than 27 as determined in accordance with ASTM E90 requirements;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(iii) Project Co shall ensure that the cumulative weight loss of particles after 300 freeze/thaw cycles shall be less than 1% as determined in accordance with ASTM C666 - Method A requirements;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(iv) Project Co shall ensure the loss of mass due to scaling after 50 freeze/thaw cycles shall be less than 0.8 kg/m2 as determined in accordance with ASTM C672 requirements;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(v) Project Co shall ensure Noise Barrier panels do not exhibit any deterioration in the form of cracks, spalls or aggregate disintegration after 50 freeze-thaw cycles;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(vi) Project Co shall provide Noise Barriers to achieve a minimum surface density of 20 kg/m2 or greater regardless if it is a solid or transparent panel;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(vii) A. anti-graffiti coating shall be applied to the absorptive side of the Noise Barrier for all instances of pre-cast concrete or wood fibre reinforced concrete;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A TO THIS CIVL INFRASTRACTURE WORKS BOD. ADRESSED IN OTHER BODS
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(vii) B. stain applied to the surface of Noise Barrier panels shall not exhibit any apparent chalking, checking or blistering after 2,400 hours exposure in accordance with ASTM G155 requirements; and
Requirement
N/A to this Civil Infrastructure Works BOD. Addressed in other BODs
[Roads]: N/A to this Civil Infrastructure Works BOD. Addressed in other BODs
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(vii) C. the total difference in colour (ΔE*) of the stain shall not be greater than 3.0 as determined in accordance with ASTM G155 requirements;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.4.6 (c)
(x) Project Co shall ensure Noise Barriers resist rusting, warping, animal and insect nesting and infestation;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be addressed in other BODs.
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(ii) plan and profile drawings of all modifications to existing roadways, demonstrating conformance with the requirements of Schedule C-6, including:
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
Section 12.9 Inputs and Outputs
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(ii) A. intersection layouts and horizontal alignment;
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
Section 12.9 Inputs and Outputs
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(ii) B. vertical alignment, highlighting any deviations from vertical alignment of the existing roadway;
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
Section 12.9 Inputs and Outputs
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(ii) D. drainage;
Requirement
Section 10 Drainage & Stormwater Management (SWM)
Addressed generically and not specifically
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(ii) E. pavement markings; and
Requirement
N/A
[Roads]: N/A
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART B - Track And Civil Works
B.7 (a)
(ii) F. location of pedestrian and cycling infrastructure;
Requirement
Section 12 At-Grade Roads and Walkway Crossings
Section 12.9 Inputs and Outputs
[Roads]: Addressed in BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (a)
(i)    Project Co shall provide all roads within the TPF sites, access roadways/driveways, right-of-way roads and construction roads to gain access to TPF sites to support the construction equipment, operations and maintenance vehicles and emergency response vehicles.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (a)
(ii)   Access and construction roads, whether temporary or permanent, shall be located within the existing right-of way or identified Lands as defined in Schedule A-11 – Lands and Encumbrances and/or new property acquired by the Contracting Authority or Project Co.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (a)
(iii)   Project Co shall build a drainage system for all existing and new access and the site in accordance with all applicable standard and requirements.
Requirement
Section 10 Drainage & Stormwater Management (SWM)
Addressed generically and not specifically
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (a)
(v)   Access, right-of-way and construction roads shall have adequate clearances from tracks in accordance with GTS-3003.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (a)
(vi)   Project Co shall provide impacted public roadways in compliance with the MTO Design Supplement for TAC Geometric Design Guide (2020).
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (a)
(vii) Project Co shall provide impacted public roadways in compliance with the MTO Roadside Design Manual (2020).
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (a)
(ix) Project Co shall provide all new access roads or make necessary improvements to existing roads, for the type of vehicles expected to use the access road inclusive of Emergency Service Provider vehicles.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (a)
(x)   Project Co shall prepare and submit all roadway design in compliance with the requirements of Schedule C-2 - Initial Works Review Procedure.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (b)
(b) Access Road Design
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (b)
(i) Design Loading
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (b)
(i) A. Project Co shall provide the access roads for the type of traffic that will be using the access road.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (b)
(ii) A. The configuration of a new access road shall provide for:
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (b)
(ii) A. i. Vehicle entry and exit points
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (b)
(ii) A. ii. Turning circles and standing areas where necessary and appropriate for vehicles proposed to use the access road.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (b)
(ii) A. iii. The width of vehicles proposed to use the access road.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.7 (b)
(ii) A. iv. The height of road vehicles proposed to use the road.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Civil/Road section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.1.13 (c)
(c) Project Co shall provide all the TPF sites grading to remain without water ponding up to and including the 100-Year Storm or regional storm, whichever is found to govern as per the site location.
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Should be covered by Drainage section the Traction Power BOD
Schedule C-6 - Initial Works Output Specifications - PART D - Systems
D.2.2 (v)
(i) D. approximate limits and location(s) of the proposed Electrification Infrastructure (such as EPB and associated fencing, flash plates, OCS hardware supports, grounding and bonding, etc.) being added to the bridge or at the Site;
Requirement
N/A to this BOD. Will be covered in other BODs
[Civil]: Related to Overhead Contact System. Should be covered by its respective BOD




Appendix B
Design Methodology Flow Charts 






